Correspondence

Lei Fang and colleagues postulate
that because severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus  (SARS-CoV-)
binds to the angiotensin-converting
enzyme  (ACE) receptor to facilitate
host cell entry,, disease severity and
mortality of coronavirus disease 
(COVID-) might be increased in
patients taking angiotensin converting
enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
during the COVID- pandemic,
because the ACE receptor might be
upregulated with use of ACEIs and
ARBs.
Although it is true that many
patients with severe COVID-
have hypertension and diabetes, as
reported by Guan and colleagues in a
study of more than  patients,
in that study other factors were also
notably unevenly distributed among
groups, including age, sex, smoking
status (eg, current smoker), and
chronic pulmonary disease. Even
though patients with diabetes and
hypertension frequently use ACEIs
and ARBs, many confounders must
be accounted for when interpreting
findings of observational studies. In
another study looking at risk factors
for mortality among patients with
COVID-, despite hypertension and
diabetes being identified as the most
frequently associated comorbidities,
after multivariate regression the
association between these disorders
and COVID- mortality was no longer
significant.

In theory, use of ACEIs and ARBs over
time would result in an upregulation of
ACE receptors. In children and young
adults, ACE receptors are present at
a much higher density in lung tissue
than in older individuals. Thus, the
condition in people taking ACEIs
and ARBs emulates that in young
people. It is possible that having more
ACE receptors provides a reserve
against target-mediated destruction
by SARS-CoV-. ACE functions to
produce the hepta­peptide angiotensin
(-), which has favourable effects
on the pulmonary endothelium
and might provide resilience from
development of pulmonary failure in
COVID-.
We caution against indiscriminate
discontinuation of ACEIs and ARBs
in patients who rely on these drugs
for treatment of heart failure and
who, additionally, might benefit
from the postulated positive effects
during overwhelming infection with
SARS-CoV-. Discontinuation of ACEIs
or ARBs is associated with readmission
to hospital and mortality among
patients with heart failure. A surge of
admissions to hospital for heart failure
because of indiscriminate cessation of
these important agents could overload
already burdened health-care systems
with vulnerable patients and cause
diagnostic problems in view of the
range of symptoms shared between
acute heart failure and COVID-, such
as cough and shortness of breath.
The quick developing nature of the
COVID- pandemic, and uncertainty
around best practice, calls for caution
when putting forward hypotheses

that suggest a change in drugs. More
evidence is needed before any clinical
decisions are made.
We declare no competing interests.

Ramon Adrade Dciencia/Science Photo Library

Antihypertensive drugs
and risk of COVID-?

*Kevin Bryan Lo, Peter A McCullough,
Janani Rangaswami
lokevinb@einstein.edu
Department of Medicine, Einstein Medical Center,
Philadelphia, PA , USA (KBL, JR); Baylor Heart
and Vascular Institute, Dallas, TX, USA (PAM); and
Sidney Kimmel College of Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
	

	

	

	

	
	

	

	

Fang L, Karakiulakis G, Roth M. Are patients
with hypertension and diabetes mellitus at
increased risk for COVID- infection?
Lancet Respir Med ; published online
March . https://doi.org/./S()-.
Ferrario CM, Jessup J, Chappell MC, et al.
Effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibition and angiotensin II receptor blockers
on cardiac angiotensin-converting enzyme .
Circulation ; : –.
Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Krueger N,
Mueller MA, Drosten C, Pöhlmann S. The novel
coronavirus  (-nCoV) uses the
SARS-coronavirus receptor ACE and the
cellular protease TMPRSS for entry into target
cells. Jan , . https://www.biorxiv.org/co
ntent/./...v
(accessed March , ).
Guan W, Ni Z, Hu Y, et al. Clinical characteristics
of coronavirus disease  in China.
N Engl J Med ; published online Feb .
DOI:./NEJMoa.
Jepsen P, Johnsen SP, Gillman MW,
Sørensen HT. Interpretation of observational
studies. Heart ; : –.
Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, et al. Clinical course and risk
factors for mortality of adult inpatients with
COVID- in Wuhan, China: a retrospective
cohort study. Lancet ; published online
March . https://doi.org/./S()-.
Gurwitz D. Angiotensin receptor blockers as
tentative SARS‐CoV‐ therapeutics.
Drug Dev Res ; published online March .
DOI:./ddr..
Oliveros E, Oni ET, Shahzad A, et al. Benefits
and risks of continuing angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor
antagonists, and mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonists during hospitalizations for acute
heart failure. Cardiorenal Med ; : –.

www.thelancet.com/respiratory Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	

Lancet Respir Med 
Published Online
March , 
https://doi.org/./
S-()-



