AAC Accepted Manuscript Posted Online  March 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. doi:./AAC.-
Copyright ©  American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.



Compounds with therapeutic potential against novel respiratory  coronavirus




Miguel Angel Martinez


IrsiCaixa, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB),



Badalona, Spain






Address correspondence to Miguel Angel Martínez, Fundació irsiCaixa, Hospital Universitari Germans



Trias i Pujol,  Badalona, Spain. Tel: + ; Fax: + ; E-mail address:



mmartinez@irsicaixa.es





Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest



Abstract



Currently, the expansion of the novel human respiratory coronavirus (known as: SARS-CoV-,



COVID-, or -nCoV) has stressed the need for therapeutic alternatives to alleviate and



stop this new epidemic. The previous epidemics of high-morbidity human coronaviruses, such



as the acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in , and the Middle East



respiratory syndrome corona virus (MERS-CoV) in , prompted the characterization of



compounds that could be potentially active against the currently emerging novel coronavirus



SARS-CoV-. The most promising compound is remdesivir (GS-), a nucleotide analog



prodrug currently in clinical trials for treating Ebola virus infections. Remdesivir inhibited the



replication of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV in tissue cultures, and it displayed efficacy in non-



human animal models. In addition, a combination of the human immunodeficiency virus type 



(HIV-) protease inhibitors, lopinavir/ritonavir, and interferon beta (LPV/RTV-INFb) were shown



to be effective in patients infected with SARS-CoV. LPV/RTV-INFb also improved clinical



parameters in marmosets and mice infected with MERS-CoV. Remarkably, the therapeutic



efficacy of remdesivir appeared to be superior to that of LPV/RTV-INFb against MERS-CoV in a



transgenic humanized mice model. The relatively high mortality rates associated with these



three novel human coronavirus infections, SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-, has



suggested that pro-inflammatory responses might play a role in the pathogenesis. It remains



unknown whether the generated inflammatory state should be targeted. Therapeutics that



target the coronavirus alone might not be able to reverse highly pathogenic infections. This



minireview aimed to provide a summary of therapeutic compounds that showed potential in



fighting SARS-CoV- infections.



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest



On December , , a cluster of  pneumonia cases (including  severe cases) of unknown



origin emerged in Wuhan (Hubei, China) and were reported to the National Health Commission



of China (). In the early stages of this pneumonia, patients developed severe acute respiratory



infection symptoms, and some patients rapidly developed acute respiratory distress syndrome



(). Real time RT-PCR and deep sequencing analysis from lower respiratory tract samples



identified a novel human coronavirus, now called SARS-CoV- (–). By the end of January,



, nearly , confirmed cases were reported in China, and the first confirmed cases were



reported in Thailand, Nepal, Republic of Korea, USA, Singapore, France, Viet Nam, Canada,



Australia, Malaysia, Germany, UAE, Finland, Italy, Cambodia, Sri Lanka, the Russian Federation,



Spain, Sweden, India, and the Philippines. Among the patients with confirmed cases, most were



aged – years and had mild infections (%). The fatality rate was around % ().




Coronaviruses can cause different types of infections in diverse animals. In humans, they mainly



produce respiratory tract infections, as observed with SARS-CoV and MERS-Cov (, ).



Sequencing and phylogenetic analyses have shown that the novel SARSCoV- virus is closely



related to a group of human SARS-like coronaviruses and bat SARS-related coronaviruses (–



). The origin of SARSCoV- remains unclear; it is unknown how it was first transmitted to



humans. The high prevalence of SARS-related coronaviruses in bats has suggested that a bat



coronavirus might have jumped into a civet or some other mammal, and from there to humans,



which started the former  SARS epidemic. Initial confirmed cases of SARSCoV- were



associated with Huanan seafood and live animal markets. However, no animal source has been



identified to date, and spillover events may continue to occur. Although bats might be the



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest





source of SARSCoV-, it is critical to identify the intermediate species to stop the current spread



and to prevent future human SARS-related coronavirus epidemics.



A key question is whether the current SARSCoV- epidemic is similar to other SARS outbreaks or



whether it shows different features. The epidemiological and clinical characteristics of



SARSCoV- indicate that this new outbreak is different from the -SARS. SARSCoV- displays



higher transmissibility and lower mortality compared to the -SARS (, , ). SARSCoV- has



shown efficient intra-familial spread (). The asymptomatic period of SARSCoV- infections



oscillates between  and  days, and some individuals probably transmit the virus without



developing any disease symptoms. It remains to be elucidated whether this virus replicates



more readily in the upper airway than SARS-CoV and MEERS-CoV and whether it is similar to



other human coronaviruses (HCoV) that cause colds, but not pneumonia. It will be necessary to



identify molecular determinants that mediate transmission from animal to human, and from



human to human. Of note, in the novel SARS-CoV-, the nucleotide sequence of the external



ectodomain in the spike protein receptor-binding domain is different from that of the 



SARS-CoV. When individual bat coronavirus spike genes were introduced into SARS-CoV



infectious clones, the SARS-CoV/bat-CoV spike viruses could bind to the human, bat, or civet



angiotensin converting enzyme  (ACE) cellular receptor (). Understanding the interaction



between this novel SARS-CoV- spike protein and the host ACE receptor might reveal how this



virus overcame the species barrier between animals and humans. As discussed below, this



information might promote the design of effective antivirals.





Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest



To predict new zoonotic coronavirus jumps across species and to understand the rate of virus



spread among people, it is crucial to determine whether SARSCoV- is mutating to improve its



binding to human receptors for infection. As an RNA virus, SARS-CoV- has intrinsic genetic



variability, which results in a high mutation rate. Moreover, coronaviruses have the largest



genomes (∼ kb) among RNA viruses. However, part of their sequence encodes a



proofreading ' exonuclease that can increase replication fidelity (). It has been suggested



that any adaptation in the SARS-CoV- sequence that might make it more efficient at



transmitting from person to person might also increase its virulence (). However, this



mechanism could lead to a genetic bottleneck, known as Muller’s ratchet, which could



significantly decrease viral fitness, (). Muller's ratchet predicts that, when mutation rates are



high and a significant proportion of mutations are deleterious, a type of irreversible ratchet



mechanism will gradually reduce the mean fitness of small populations of asexual organisms.



Because genetic bottlenecks for RNA viruses often occur during respiratory droplet



transmissions, the SARS-CoV- is expected to become less virulent through human to human



transmissions ().




From the public health perspective, we urgently need to develop an effective vaccine and



antiviral therapeutics to stop the SARS-CoV- epidemic. Moreover, social and economic issues



generated by this epidemic also call for rapid interventions. This review focuses on the



potential of repurposing preexisting compounds that might provide new opportunities for



treating people infected with SARS-CoV-. Previous work with SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV has



provided an opportunity to accelerate the identification of meaningful therapies for fighting the



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest





novel SARS-CoV- epidemic. Nevertheless, we must be aware that, currently, no compound



that targets SARS-CoV or MERS-CoV has moved beyond phase  trials.



The most promising antiviral for fighting SARS-CoV- is remdesivir (GS-). Remdesivir is an



adenosine nucleotide analogue prodrug with broad-spectrum antiviral activity against



filoviruses, paramyxoviruses, pneumoviruses, and pathogenic coronaviruses, like SARS-CoV and



MERS-CoV (). Pharmacokinetic studies have been completed and clinical trials are ongoing



for testing remdesivir efficacy in treating Ebola virus (). Previous studies have indicated that



nucleotide analogues generally show low efficacy against coronaviruses, due to the virus



exonuclease proofreading enzyme. Nevertheless, remdesivir was effective against SARS-CoV,



MERS-CoV, and bat-CoV strains (). In tissue cultures, remdesivir displayed half-maximum



effective concentrations (ECs) of . for SARS-CoV and . μM for MERS-CoV. Of note,



tissue culture studies have shown that remdesivir is also active in the submicromolar EC



range against a number of highly divergent coronaviruses, including the endemic human CoVs,



OC (HCoV-OC) and E (HCoV-E). Thus, remdesivir has broad-spectrum anti-CoV



activity (). In a mouse model of SARS-CoV pathogenesis, prophylactic and early therapeutic



administration of remdesivir significantly reduced the lung viral load. Viral titers were reduced



by > orders of magnitude on day  or  post infection. Remdesivir improved the clinical signs



of disease and respiratory function compared to untreated control animals (). Comparable



results were obtained with MERS-CoV in prophylactic studies carried out with a MERS-CoV



mouse transgenic model. In that model, a humanized MERS-CoV receptor (dipeptidyl peptidase



, hDPP) was expressed and carboxylesterase c (Cesc) was deleted to improve the



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest



pharmacokinetics of nucleotide prodrugs (). Remdesivir specificity for coronavirus was



demonstrated by propagating the virus in tissue culture. After  passages in the presence of



drug, two mutations were identified (FL and VL) in the viral RNA-dependent RNA



polymerase gene. These mutations increased the replication capacity of the virus in the



presence of remdesivir (). However, these amino acid changes decreased the viral fitness and



attenuated SARS-CoV pathogenesis in mice (). The efficacy of prophylactic and therapeutic



remdesivir treatment was recently tested in a nonhuman primate ( rhesus macaque) model of



MERS-CoV infection (). When prophylactic remdesivir treatment was initiated  h prior to



inoculation, MERS-CoV was prevented from inducing clinical disease and inhibited from



replicating in respiratory tissues, which prevented the formation of lung lesions. Similar results



were obtained when therapeutic remdesivir treatment was initiated at  h after virus



inoculation (). Human safety data are available for remdesivir (); thus, human trials can be



initiated for testing the efficacy of this compound against novel coronaviruses.




Therapies that are approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have been evaluated



for antiviral activity against SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. For example, lopinavir (LPV), a human



immunodeficiency virus  (HIV-) protease inhibitor, was combined with ritonavir (RTV) to



increase the LPV half-life. LPV/RTV was shown to be effective against SARS-CoV in patients and



in tissue culture. The estimated EC in fetal rhesus kidney- cells was  µg/ml (). LPV/RTV



also reduced weight loss, clinical scores, viral titers, and disease progression in marmosets



infected with MERS-CoV (). Nevertheless, the antiviral activity of LPV against MERS-CoV in



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest





tissue culture remains controversial. No optimal EC was found in Vero cells (), but an EC



of  µM was reported in Huh cells ().



Clinical observations in animals and humans showed that MERS-CoV infections were mediated



by both virus replication and host inflammatory responses. Those findings led to explorations of



combination therapies that included types I and II interferons (IFN I and II). Interferon beta



(IFNb) displayed the best efficacy, with ECs of .- IU/ml, for reducing MERS-CoV



replication in tissue culture (, ). Similar to LPV/RTV, clinical improvements with IFNb were



observed in common marmosets infected with MERS-CoV (). In the Kingdom of South Arabia,



an ongoing randomized control trial (MIRACLE Trial) was initiated to determine whether the



combination of LPV/RTV and IFNb could improve clinical outcomes in MERS-CoV infections ().



Importantly, another controlled trial was launched in China to test the efficacy of LPV/RTV and



IFNα-b in hospitalized patients with SARS-CoV- infections (ChiCTR).




The prophylactic and therapeutic properties of remdesivir and LPV/RTV-IFNb were compared in



a humanized transgenic mouse MERS-CoV infection model (). Remdesivir improved



pulmonary function, reduced lung viral loads, and ameliorated severe lung pathology. In



contrast, prophylactic LPV/RTV-IFNb only slightly reduced viral loads and did not impact other



disease parameters, and therapeutic LPV/RTV-IFNb improved pulmonary function, but did not



reduce virus replication or severe lung pathology (). Overall, these results indicated that



remdesivir showed more potential than LPV/RTV-IFNb for treating MERS-CoV infections.





Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest



Ribavirin, a guanosine analogue, is an antiviral compound used to treat several virus infections,



including respiratory syncytial virus, hepatitis C virus, and some viral hemorrhagic fevers. In



most cases, ribavirin is combined with IFN. Ribavirin was first marketed in  for the



treatment of respiratory syncytial virus in children. Although promising results were obtained



with ribavirin and IFNα-b in a MERS-CoV rhesus macaque model (), data have been



conflicting on patients with MERS-CoV infections that were treated with a combination of



ribavirin and IFN (either αa or β) (). However, ribavirin reduces hemoglobin



concentrations, an undesirable side effect in patients with respiratory disorders. This feature



reduces its potential as an antiviral against SARS-CoV-.




Work with influenza virus has shown that monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies can be useful



prophylactic and therapeutic tools. Several antibodies have been shown to bind influenza virus



hemagglutinin and inhibit virus replication (). For example, human immunoglobulin G (IgG)



monoclonal antibody (MHAAA) binds to a highly conserved epitope on the stalk of



influenza A hemagglutinin. In a phase  human influenza A virus challenge study, MHAAA



significantly reduced the clinical symptoms and viral burden relative to placebo (). Another



example is VIS, a monoclonal antibody engineered to target all known influenza A strains. A



phase a trial showed that VIS had some clinical benefits (). Current development efforts



in monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies against coronaviruses are mainly targeting MERS-CoV.



In a phase  clinical trial, a human polyclonal antibody, SAB-, which is generated in trans-



chromosomic cattle, was found to be safe and well tolerated in healthy participants. ().



However, therapeutic treatment with human monoclonal antibodies did not protect against the



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest



severe disease or the loss of lung function induced by MERS-CoV in animal models (). The



lack of viral sequence homology among different human coronaviruses suggests that current



investigational antibody-based therapeutics will not be effective against novel virus variants.



Nevertheless, immune-based therapies should be not discarded, when considering future



treatments for novel coronaviruses.




Another potential treatment option could be the use of novel coronavirus sera prepared from



the blood of patients in convalescence (convalescent sera). Passive immunization is well



established for viral infection prophylaxis. Polyclonal antibody products have been licensed that



target cytomegalovirus, hepatitis B virus, and varicella-zoster virus. A meta-analysis of reports



on the  influenza A (HN) epidemic concluded that early administration of convalescent



blood products reduced the absolute risk of pneumonia-related death from % to % ().



Nevertheless, the appropriate titer of convalescent sera antibody that is required for



therapeutic efficacy against SARS-CoV- remains to be determined. Moreover, additional



studies performed with influenza virus have produced controversial results regarding the



clinical benefit of administering high titers of anti-influenza immunoglobulins (). Finally, it



remains unclear whether a sufficient pool of potential donors is feasible. Work carried out with



MERS-CoV showed that sera from patients recovering from infections did not contain sufficient



antibody titers for therapeutic use ().




Another interesting therapeutic alternative that was previously explored with influenza virus is



to target cellular components involved in the host inflammatory response to the infection. For



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest



example, the activation of the inflammatory response to an infection can induce a cytokine



outburst that results in an acute lung injury. An example of a therapy for this type of infection



has been to target the cellular toll-like receptor  (TLR) with specific antibodies. TLR is a



transmembrane protein that belongs to the pattern recognition receptor (PRR) family. The



prototype pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) that TLR recognizes is the gram-



negative bacteria, endotoxin, lipopolysaccharide (LPS). TLR has been implicated in the



pathology associated with other infections and with tissue damage caused by non-infectious



insults. TLR activation leads to the NF-κB intracellular signaling pathway and inflammatory



cytokine production, which activate the innate immune system. Interestingly, TLR-null mice



were highly resistant to infection by the mouse-adapted influenza A virus (). Thus, protection



against influenza infections was achieved by targeting TLR with small molecule antagonists,



like TAK-, or with anti-TLR-specific antibodies (, ). Indeed, targeting a cellular protein



would overcome the drawbacks associated with virus or coronavirus genetic heterogeneity.




The high mortally rates observed in some emerging respiratory diseases induced by viruses like



MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV, and novel influenza A strains (HN) has given rise to the hypothesis that



the pro-inflammatory response might be involved in the disease pathogenesis. Consequently,



immunosuppressants (e.g., corticosteroids) might be used as an adjunct for treating severe



forms of the disease. However, the therapeutic use of immunosuppressants is not free of



controversy. To date, no conclusive results have been found for the effects of



immunosuppressants in severe influenza virus infections (). Furthermore, the use of



corticosteroids to treat influenza virus has been associated with an increased risk of



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest



superinfection, prolonged viral replication, and an increased risk of death (). In contrast,



corticosteroid treatment for MERS-CoV infections was not significantly associated with



mortality, although a delay in MERS-CoV RNA clearance was observed (). Further studies



should be performed to clarify the potential clinical benefit of prescribing immunosuppressants



for coronavirus infections.




To end this minireview, we will discuss an interesting potential antiviral strategy. The spike



protein of SARS-CoV mediates viral entry into target cells. Intriguingly, the cleavage and



activation of the SARS-CoV spike protein by a host cell protease is essential for infectious viral



entry (). This host protease could be a type II transmembrane serine protease, TMPRSS,



which was shown to cleave and activate SARS-CoV spike protein in cell cultures. Therefore,



TMPRSS is a potential a target for antiviral interventions. For example, the serine protease



inhibitor, camostat mesylate, inhibits the enzymatic activity of TMPRSS (). Recently, K,



a cysteine protease inhibitor, was shown in tissue cultures to inhibit SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV



replication in the sub-nanomolar range (). Future tissue culture and animal model studies



should be conducted to clarify the potential antiviral activity of targeting TMPRSS.




By the end of February , two months after the first cases of SARS-CoV- were reported in



China, several hundreds of new infection cases had been registered, mainly in other Asian



regions and Europe. This news has strongly suggested that we are in the thick of a SARS-CoV-



pandemic. Social alarm and health authorities have called for the development of therapeutic



alternatives for fighting the current, and possibly new, coronavirus epidemics. Animal models



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest





and clinical studies are urgently needed for evaluating the effectiveness and safety of promising



antiviral compounds that target the virus and/or the immunopathology involved in the host



responses. The identification and characterization of novel compounds and therapeutic



alternatives will be required to better control this probable pandemic outbreak.



Funding. This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation [SAF–



-R].




Conflicts of interest. The author declares no conflict of interest.





Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest



References
.
WHO. . Novel coronavirus (-nCoV) situation reports. World Health
Organisation. https//www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus/situation-reports/.
.
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, Zhang L, Fan G, Xu J, Gu X, Cheng Z, Yu T, Xia J,
Wei Y, Wu W, Xie X, Yin W, Li H, Liu M, Xiao Y, Gao H, Guo L, Xie J, Wang G, Jiang R, Gao
Z, Jin Q, Wang J, Cao B. . Clinical features of patients infected with  novel
coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet :–.
.
Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, Qiu Y, Wang J, Liu Y, Wei Y, Xia J, Yu T,
Zhang X, Zhang L. . Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of  cases of 
novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet :–.
.
Chan JFW, Yuan S, Kok KH, To KKW, Chu H, Yang J, Xing F, Liu J, Yip CCY, Poon RWS, Tsoi
HW, Lo SKF, Chan KH, Poon VKM, Chan WM, Ip JD, Cai JP, Cheng VCC, Chen H, Hui CKM,
Yuen KY. . A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the  novel
coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet
:–.
.
Gorbalenya AE. . Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus – The
species and its viruses, a statement of the Coronavirus Study Group. bioRxiv
....
.
Team TNCPERE. . The Epidemiological Characteristics of an Outbreak of  Novel
Coronavirus Diseases (COVID-) — China, . China CDC Wkly .
.
Zaki AM, Van Boheemen S, Bestebroer TM, Osterhaus ADME, Fouchier RAM. .
Isolation of a novel coronavirus from a man with pneumonia in Saudi Arabia. N Engl J
Med :–.
.
Drosten C, Günther S, Preiser W, Van der Werf S, Brodt HR, Becker S, Rabenau H, Panning
M, Kolesnikova L, Fouchier RAM, Berger A, Burguière AM, Cinatl J, Eickmann M, Escriou
N, Grywna K, Kramme S, Manuguerra JC, Müller S, Rickerts V, Stürmer M, Vieth S, Klenk
HD, Osterhaus ADME, Schmitz H, Doerr HW. . Identification of a novel coronavirus in
patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome. N Engl J Med :–.
.
Zhou P, Yang X-L, Wang X-G, Hu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, Si H-R, Zhu Y, Li B, Huang C-L, Chen
H-D, Chen J, Luo Y, Guo H, Jiang R-D, Liu M-Q, Chen Y, Shen X-R, Wang X, Zheng X-S, Zhao
K, Chen Q-J, Deng F, Liu L-L, Yan B, Zhan F-X, Wang Y-Y, Xiao G-F, Shi Z-L. . A
pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature
Feb [Online ahead of print].
. Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, Niu P, Yang B, Wu H, Wang W, Song H, Huang B, Zhu N, Bi Y, Ma X, Zhan
F, Wang L, Hu T, Zhou H, Hu Z, Zhou W, Zhao L, Chen J, Meng Y, Wang J, Lin Y, Yuan J, Xie
Z, Ma J, Liu WJ, Wang D, Xu W, Holmes EC, Gao GF, Wu G, Chen W, Shi W, Tan W. .
Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of  novel coronavirus: implications for
virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet :-.
. Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang B, Song J, Zhao X, Huang B, Shi W, Lu R, Niu P, Zhan F,
Ma X, Wang D, Xu W, Wu G, Gao GF, Tan W. . A Novel Coronavirus from Patients
with Pneumonia in China, . N Engl J Med :-.
. Beigel JH, Nam HH, Adams PL, Krafft A, Ince WL, El-Kamary SS, Sims AC. . Advances
in respiratory virus therapeutics – A meeting report from the th isirv Antiviral Group


Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest














































.

.
.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

conference. Antiviral Res :-.
Bradwell K, Combe M, Domingo-Calap P, Sanjuán R. . Correlation between mutation
rate and genome size in riboviruses: Mutation rate of bacteriophage Qβ. Genetics
:–.
Wang C, Horby PW, Hayden FG, Gao GF. . A novel coronavirus outbreak of global
health concern. Lancet :-.
Chao L. . Fitness of RNA virus decreased by Muller’s ratchet. Nature :–.
Duarte E, Clarke D, Moya A, Domingo E, Holland J. . Rapid fitness losses in
mammalian RNA virus clones due to Muller’s ratchet. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A :–
.
Sheahan TP, Sims AC, Graham RL, Menachery VD, Gralinski LE, Case JB, Leist SR, Pyrc K,
Feng JY, Trantcheva I, Bannister R, Park Y, Babusis D, Clarke MO, MacKman RL, Spahn JE,
Palmiotti CA, Siegel D, Ray AS, Cihlar T, Jordan R, Denison MR, Baric RS. . Broadspectrum antiviral GS- inhibits both epidemic and zoonotic coronaviruses. Sci Transl
Med .
Mulangu S, Dodd LE, Davey RT, Mbaya OT, Proschan M, Mukadi D, Manzo ML, Nzolo D,
Oloma AT, Ibanda A, Ali R, Coulibaly S, Levine AC, Grais R, Diaz J, Clifford Lane H,
Muyembe-Tamfum JJ, Sivahera B, Camara M, Kojan R, Walker R, Dighero-Kemp B, Cao H,
Mukumbayi P, Mbala-Kingebeni P, Ahuka S, Albert S, Bonnett T, Crozier I, Duvenhage M,
Proffitt C, Teitelbaum M, Moench T, Aboulhab J, Barrett K, Cahill K, Cone K, Eckes R,
Hensley L, Herpin B, Higgs E, Ledgerwood J, Pierson J, Smolskis M, Sow Y, Tierney J,
Sivapalasingam S, Holman W, Gettinger N, Vallée D, Nordwall J. . A randomized,
controlled trial of Ebola virus disease therapeutics. N Engl J Med :–.
Brown AJ, Won JJ, Graham RL, Dinnon KH, Sims AC, Feng JY, Cihlar T, Denison MR, Baric
RS, Sheahan TP. . Broad spectrum antiviral remdesivir inhibits human endemic and
zoonotic deltacoronaviruses with a highly divergent RNA dependent RNA polymerase.
Antiviral Res :.
Cockrell AS, Yount BL, Scobey T, Jensen K, Douglas M, Beall A, Tang XC, Marasco WA,
Heise MT, Baric RS. . A mouse model for MERS coronavirus-induced acute
respiratory distress syndrome. Nat Microbiol :.
Agostini ML, Andres EL, Sims AC, Graham RL, Sheahan TP, Lu X, Smith EC, Case JB, Feng
JY, Jordan R, Ray AS, Cihlar T, Siegel D, Mackman RL, Clarke MO, Baric RS, Denison MR.
. Coronavirus susceptibility to the antiviral remdesivir (GS-) is mediated by the
viral polymerase and the proofreading exoribonuclease. MBio :e-.
de Wit E, Feldmann F, Cronin J, Jordan R, Okumura A, Thomas T, Scott D, Cihlar T,
Feldmann H. . Prophylactic and therapeutic remdesivir (GS-) treatment in the
rhesus macaque model of MERS-CoV infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci .
Chu CM, Cheng VCC, Hung IFN, Wong MML, Chan KH, Chan KS, Kao RYT, Poon LLM, Wong
CLP, Guan Y, Peiris JSM, Yuen KY. . Role of lopinavir/ritonavir in the treatment of
SARS: Initial virological and clinical findings. Thorax :–.
Chan JFW, Yao Y, Yeung ML, Deng W, Bao L, Jia L, Li F, Xiao C, Gao H, Yu P, Cai JP, Chu H,
Zhou J, Chen H, Qin C, Yuen KY. . No TitleTreatment With Lopinavir/Ritonavir or
Interferon-βb Improves Outcome of MERS-CoV Infection in a Nonhuman Primate Model
of Common Marmoset. J Infect Dis :–.


Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest














































.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Chan JFW, Chan KH, Kao RYT, To KKW, Zheng BJ, Li CPY, Li PTW, Dai J, Mok FKY, Chen H,
Hayden FG, Yuen KY. . Broad-spectrum antivirals for the emerging Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus. J Infect :–.
De Wilde AH, Jochmans D, Posthuma CC, Zevenhoven-Dobbe JC, Van Nieuwkoop S,
Bestebroer TM, Van Den Hoogen BG, Neyts J, Snijder EJ. . Screening of an FDAapproved compound library identifies four small-molecule inhibitors of Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus replication in cell culture. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother :–.
Hart BJ, Dyall J, Postnikova E, Zhou H, Kindrachuk J, Johnson RF, Olinger GG, Frieman MB,
Holbrook MR, Jahrling PB, Hensley L. . Interferon-β and mycophenolic acid are
potent inhibitors of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus in cell-based assays. J
Gen Virol :–.
Arabi YM, Alothman A, Balkhy HH, Al-Dawood A, AlJohani S, Al Harbi S, Kojan S, Al Jeraisy
M, Deeb AM, Assiri AM, Al-Hameed F, AlSaedi A, Mandourah Y, Almekhlafi GA, Sherbeeni
NM, Elzein FE, Memon J, Taha Y, Almotairi A, Maghrabi KA, Qushmaq I, Al Bshabshe A,
Kharaba A, Shalhoub S, Jose J, Fowler RA, Hayden FG, Hussein MA, Martin GS, Schoenfeld
DA, Walmsley SL, Carson S, Harbi S Al, Jeraisy M Al, Muhaidib M Al, Musharaf S, Anizi H
Al, Dael R, AlMazroa M, Asiri A, Memish ZA, Ghazal SS, Alfaraj SH, Harthy A Al, Sulaiman
M Al, Mady A, Ahmad A, Ghaleb A Almekhlafi, Muhammed R, Samirrai S Al, Awad S,
Cabal RC, Onazi B Al, Aljuhani M, Vince M, Enani M Al, Alqurashi A, Alenezi F, Alkhani N,
Thaqafi A, Oraabi O Al, Rifai J, Elsamadisi P, Medhat SH, Basher SAB, Abduldhaher M,
Bajhamoum W, Alahsa SS, Bashir S, Al-Dossary I, Al-Muhainy Dammam B, Khobar SS Al,
Alshahrani MS, Al Jabri A, Farid M, Alaidarous A, Alseraihi W, Shahada H, Taif JS. .
Treatment of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome with a combination of lopinavirritonavir and interferon-βb (MIRACLE trial): Study protocol for a randomized controlled
trial. Trials :.
Sheahan TP, Sims AC, Leist SR, Schäfer A, Won J, Brown AJ, Montgomery SA, Hogg A,
Babusis D, Clarke MO, Spahn JE, Bauer L, Sellers S, Porter D, Feng JY, Cihlar T, Jordan R,
Denison MR, Baric RS. . Comparative therapeutic efficacy of remdesivir and
combination lopinavir, ritonavir, and interferon beta against MERS-CoV. Nat Commun
:.
Falzarano D, De Wit E, Rasmussen AL, Feldmann F, Okumura A, Scott DP, Brining D,
Bushmaker T, Martellaro C, Baseler L, Benecke AG, Katze MG, Munster VJ, Feldmann H.
. Treatment with interferon-αb and ribavirin improves outcome in MERS-CoVinfected rhesus macaques. Nat Med :–.
Arabi, YM, Shalhoub, S, Omari, AA, Mandourah, Y, Al-Hameed, F, Sindi A, Alraddadi, B,
Motairi, AA, Khatib, KA, Mommin, AA, Qushmaq, IA, Mady A, Solaiman, O, Aithan, AA,
Balkhy, HH, Al-Raddadi, R, Rajab, A, Mekhlafi G, Harthy, AA, Kharaba, A, Al-Jabbary, A,
Pinto, R, Sadat, M, Mutairi, HA Q, EA, Jose, J, Deeb, AM, Merson, L, Hayden, FG, Fowler,
R, Aldawood A. . Effect of ribavirin and interferon on the outcome of critically ill
patients with MERS. Am J Respir Crit Care Med :A.
McBride JM, Lim JJ, Burgess T, Deng R, Derby MA, Maia M, Horn P, Siddiqui O, Sheinson
D, Chen-Harris H, Newton EM, Fillos D, Nazzal D, Rosenberger CM, Ohlson MB, LambkinWilliams R, Fathi H, Harris JM, Tavela JA. . Phase  randomized trial of the safety and


Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest














































.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

efficacy of MHAAA, a broadly neutralizing monoclonal antibody, in a human
influenza a virus challenge model. Antimicrob Agents Chemother : e-.
Hershberger E, Sloan S, Narayan K, Hay CA, Smith P, Engler F, Jeeninga R, Smits S, Trevejo
J, Shriver Z, Oldach D. . Safety and efficacy of monoclonal antibody VIS in adults
with uncomplicated influenza A infection: Results from a randomized, double-blind,
phase-, placebo-controlled study. EBioMedicine :–.
Beigel JH, Voell J, Kumar P, Raviprakash K, Wu H, Jiao JA, Sullivan E, Luke T, Davey RT.
. Safety and tolerability of a novel, polyclonal human anti-MERS coronavirus
antibody produced from transchromosomic cattle: a phase  randomised, double-blind,
single-dose-escalation study. Lancet Infect Dis :–.
Luke TC, Kilbane EM, Jackson JL, Hoffman SL. . Meta-analysis: Convalescent blood
products for Spanish influenza pneumonia: A future HN treatment? Ann Intern Med.
American College of Physicians :-.
Hung IFN, To KKW, Lee CK, Lee KL, Yan WW, Chan K, Chan WM, Ngai CW, Law KI, Chow
FL, Liu R, Lai KY, Candy CC, Liu SH, Chan KH, Lin CK, Yuen KY. . Hyperimmune IV
immunoglobulin treatment: A multicenter double-blind randomized controlled trial for
patients with severe  influenza A(HN) infection. Chest :–.
Arabi Y, Balkhy H, Hajeer AH, Bouchama A, Hayden FG, Al-Omari A, Al-Hameed FM, Taha
Y, Shindo N, Whitehead J, Merson L, AlJohani S, Al-Khairy K, Carson G, Luke TC, Hensley L,
Al-Dawood A, Al-Qahtani S, Modjarrad K, Sadat M, Rohde G, Leport C, Fowler R. .
Feasibility, safety, clinical, and laboratory effects of convalescent plasma therapy for
patients with Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection: a study protocol.
Springerplus :–.
Shirey KA, Lai W, Scott AJ, Lipsky M, Mistry P, Pletneva LM, Karp CL, McAlees J, Gioannini
TL, Weiss J, Chen WH, Ernst RK, Rossignol DP, Gusovsky F, Blanco JCG, Vogel SN. .
The TLR antagonist Eritoran protects mice from lethal influenza infection. Nature
:–.
Perrin-Cocon L, Aublin-Gex A, Sestito SE, Shirey KA, Patel MC, André P, Blanco JC, Vogel
SN, Peri F, Lotteau V. . TLR antagonist FP inhibits LPS-induced cytokine production
and glycolytic reprogramming in dendritic cells, and protects mice from lethal influenza
infection. Sci Rep :.
Piao W, Shirey KA, Ru LW, Lai W, Szmacinski H, Snyder GA, Sundberg EJ, Lakowicz JR,
Vogel SN, Toshchakov VY. . A Decoy Peptide that Disrupts TIRAP Recruitment to
TLRs Is Protective in a Murine Model of Influenza. Cell Rep :–.
Rodrigo C, Leonardi-Bee J, Nguyen-Van-Tam J, Lim WS. . Corticosteroids as
adjunctive therapy in the treatment of influenza. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. John
Wiley and Sons Ltd :CD.
Arabi YM, Mandourah Y, Al-Hameed F, Sindi AA, Almekhlafi GA, Hussein MA, Jose J, Pinto
R, Al-Omari A, Kharaba A, Almotairi A, Al Khatib K, Alraddadi B, Shalhoub S, Abdulmomen
A, Qushmaq I, Mady A, Mady O, Al-Aithan AM, Al-Raddadi R, Ragab A, Balkhy HH, Balkhy
A, Deeb AM, Al Mutairi H, Al-Dawood A, Merson L, Hayden FG, Fowler RA. .
Corticosteroid therapy for critically ill patients with middle east respiratory syndrome.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med :–.
Glowacka I, Bertram S, Muller MA, Allen P, Soilleux E, Pfefferle S, Steffen I, Tsegaye TS,


Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest














































.

.

He Y, Gnirss K, Niemeyer D, Schneider H, Drosten C, Pohlmann S. . Evidence that
TMPRSS Activates the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Spike Protein for
Membrane Fusion and Reduces Viral Control by the Humoral Immune Response. J Virol
:–.
Kawase M, Shirato K, van der Hoek L, Taguchi F, Matsuyama S. . Simultaneous
Treatment of Human Bronchial Epithelial Cells with Serine and Cysteine Protease
Inhibitors Prevents Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Entry. J Virol
:–.
Zhou Y, Vedantham P, Lu K, Agudelo J, Carrion R, Nunneley JW, Barnard D, Pöhlmann S,
McKerrow JH, Renslo AR, Simmons G. . Protease inhibitors targeting coronavirus
and filovirus entry. Antiviral Res :–.



Downloaded from http://aac.asm.org/ on March ,  by guest













