medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

Epidemiological and Clinical Characteristics of Children with Coronavirus
Disease 
Qin Wu*, Yuhan Xing*, Lei Shi*, Wenjie Li, Yang Gao, Silin Pan, Ying Wang#,
Wendi Wang#, Quansheng Xing#
.

Qingdao Women and Children’s Hospital, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China

.

Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China

.

Department of Paediatrics, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan , China.

*Contributed equally
#Correspondence

：

Ying Wang Department of Paediatrics, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan , China.
No.  Hongkong Road, , Wuhan, China
E-mail: wywy@.com

：

Wendi Wang Qingdao Women and Children’s Hospital, Qingdao University,
Qingdao, China
No. Tongfu Road, , Qingdao, China.
E-mail: wwdmona@.com

Quansheng Xing, MD, PhD: Qingdao Women and Children’s Hospital, Qingdao
University, Qingdao, China
No. Tongfu Road, , Qingdao, China.
E-mail: xingqs@.com

Funding: This work is supported by The National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) [Grant number ]; Distinguished Taishan Scholars ();

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

Qingdao Outstanding Young Health Professional Development Fund () and
Qingdao People's Livelihood Science and Technology Program(----nsh)

Introduction
During the last three months, we have witnessed the fast-growing outbreak of
coronavirus disease  (COVID-) swept through China and rapidly spread to all
over the world. The etiological agent, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
 (SARS-CoV-), was identified as a novel pathogen with high infectiousness to
general population and relatively high mortality rate. According to the lasted data
released by the WHO on th March , , confirmed cases of COVID-
were reported in  countries and regions globally, causing , deaths. Currently,
the epidemic center has been shifted to Europe and WHO advocated that Europe
should learn the lessons from China on infection control. Several COVID- studies
from the Chinese researchers

-

have provided first-hand knowledge and valuable

treatment experiences on the disease for other countries, but most of the studies were
targeted at adult patients. Although pediatric cases of COVID- were constantly
reported, the majority of published studies were case reports or studies with sample
size of less than  pediatric cases.

-

To determine the spectrum of disease in

children, we collected and analyzed epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, and
radiologic data of  pediatric COVID- cases in two locations of northern and
southern China. We hope our study would further the available knowledge regarding
SARS-CoV- infection in children and provide an insight to treatment strategies and
prophylactic control of the disease.
Methods
Data sources
From January th to February th of , we retrospectively reviewed electronic
medical records of  pediatric COVID- cases admitted in Qingdao Women's and
Children's Hospital and Wuhan Children's Hospital, including data recorded during
hospitalization and follow-up period. Baseline information (gender, age, weight, time
of onset, time of diagnosis by SARS-CoV- nucleic acid test, time of admission and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

discharge), epidemiological history, clinical manifestations, laboratory and radiologic
findings, treatment, outcome and follow-up data were recorded with standardized data
collection forms. This study was approved by the institutional review board of the
ethics committee in our hospital (QFELL-KY--) and written informed consent
was obtained from patients’ legal guardians prior to enrollment.
Determination of exposure history
Detailed epidemiological data of all cases were collected and classified according to
whether the case was household contacts of confirmed adult patients, the sequence of
infection within the family, and whether the infected children transmitted the virus to
others.
Laboratory confirmation
Confirmation of COVID- was based on a positive result for real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing of SARS-CoV- in
nasopharynx swabs by hospital laboratory, and double-confirmed by local Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention using the same RT-PCR protocol. Final decision on
COVID- diagnosis was made according to WHO interim guidance. 
Diagnosis classification
According to the experts’ consensus statement on diagnosis, treatment, and prevention
of  novel coronavirus infection in children issued by group of respirology of
Chinese Pediatric Society,



patients were classified into  types: asymptomatic

infection, acute upper respiratory tract infection and mild pneumonia, severe
pneumonia and critical cases (acute respiratory syndrome, SARS). The type of mild
pneumonia was further sub-grouped into subclinical type and clinical type depending
on whether the case had clinical manifestation.
Statistical analysis
Categorical data were expressed as number (%) and continuous data were expressed
as median with range or interquartile. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS
software (SAS.; SAS Institute Inc, Cary, North Carolina, USA).
Role of the funding source
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

interpretation, or writing of this manuscript. The corresponding authors had full
access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to
submit for publication.
Results
Basic characteristics
None of the  infected children had comorbidities. Detailed data of baseline
characteristics of the patients were listed in Table  and Figure  showed the timeline
of disease progression including the following points in time: the date of admission,
diagnosis, and discharge and the final date of follow-up.
Epidemiological characteristics
Complete information of exposure history was collected from  of the  patients
(.%). Except for  sporadic cases,  (/, .%) cases were household
contacts of adults whose symptoms developed earlier and the last confirmed case
within the family, including  (.%) being the second infected family member,
 (.%) being the third,  (.%) being the fourth,  (.%) being the fifth
and  (.%) being the sixth. There has been no evidence showing the virus was
transmitted from children to others.
Clinical features
Diagnosis and classification: There was only one severe pneumonia case among the
 infected children, and the rest consisted of  cases of asymptomatic infection, 
acute upper respiratory tract infection cases and  mild pneumonia cases, accounting
for .%, .% and .% respectively. Thirty (.%) children did not have
clinical symptoms and were identified by SARS-CoV- nucleic acid screening test,
and  of them were finally confirmed as asymptomatic carriers whereas  children
were classified as subclinical mild pneumonia patients.
Clinical manifestations: Cough (.%) and fever (.%) were the most common
symptom at the onset of disease. Other symptoms like fatigue, chest congestion,
anorexia, diarrhea, dyspnea, headache and expectoration were seldom; myalgia,
pharyngalgia, dizziness and myalgia was rather rare. Detailed data are listed in table .
Except fever, all the positive signs were related to respiratory system, including

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

rhonchi and crackles in  cases (.%). No children showed obvious positive signs
of nervous system and digestive system. The most severe case was a -year-old boy
with body-weight of  kg who presented with high fever and cough at onset of the
disease, and his fever lasted for  days with a highest body temperature of .

.

During hospitalization, he suffered from dyspnea with low proximal oxygen
saturation of % on room air and had bilateral diffuse breath sounds of crackles
which could be heard for  days.
Laboratory findings (table ): There were  cases (.%) with abnormal
leukocyte count, being increased in  cases (.%) with a highest level of . ×
/L and reduced in  cases (.%) with a bottom level of . × /L. Abnormal
lymphocyte count was found in  cases (.%), among whom  (.%) had
increased number of lymphocytes (highest count . × /L) and  (.%) had
reduced number of lymphocytes (lowest count . × /L). C-reactive protein (CRP)
was increased in  cases (.%) with a highest serum level of .mg/L. Elevation
of procalcitonin (PCT) was observed in  cases (.%) with a highest level of
.ug/L. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was measured for  (.%)
patients and  (/, .%, - mm/h) of them had accelerated results. Of 
cases,  (.%) were screened for common respiratory pathogens and  of them
(/, .%) had co-infection, including  cases co-infected with mycoplasma
pneumoniae (MP),  with MP and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV),  with MP and
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),  with cytomegalovirus (CMV),  with CMV and EBV,
and  with MP, influenza A&B and RSV. Other routine laboratory testing showed no
obvious abnormality. Ten (.%) children had RT-PCR analysis for SARS-CoV- in
fecal specimens and viral RNA remained positive in stools of  convalescent patients
after respiratory specimens showing negative. The time for SARS-CoV- RNA in
fecal specimens turning negative after negative conversion in nasopharynx swabs
ranged from  to  days, with a median of days.
Radiologic findings: Four (.%) children only had chest computed tomography
(CT) examination once which was done on admission and did not show any
abnormalities. The other  (.%) children included in this study had chest CT

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

examination both at the time of admission and discharge. Radiological changes were
found in  (.%) patients, with  (/, .%) cases in left lung,  (/,
.%) cases in right lung and  (.%) cases bilaterally. Of the  cases with
abnormal chest CT findings,  cases (.%) had clinical symptoms, and  (/,
.%) showed no symptoms during the whole course of illness. There were only 
cases (/, .%) with typical changes of SARS-CoV- infection in chest CT
imaging, including patches of ground glass opacity which were mainly distributed
near the pleura (Figure. ). Changes in CT imaging of the other  cases was
nonspecific for SARS-CoV- infection (Figure. ). No large area of "white lung",
pleural effusion and pneumothorax was found among the patients. Chest CT imaging
of the most severe case only showed abnormalities of common viral pneumonia
(Figure. ).
Treatment and outcomes: All the  cases were treated according to the experts’
consensus statement on diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of  novel
coronavirus infection in children issued by group of respirology of Chinese Pediatric
Society,



including interferon inhalation, administration of antiviral drugs and

Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM). Fifteen patients with confirmed MP infection
were treated with azithromycin orally or intravenously, and the other  children
received empirical antibiotic therapy. Only the -year-old severe case was given
systematic corticosteroids for  days and gamma globulin for  days. No patient
required mechanical ventilation except one severe child who received noninvasive
ventilation for  days. All the  patients were discharged based on the tentative fifth
or sixth edition for Diagnosis and Treatment of COVID- (tentative fifth or sixth
edition) issued by the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China
, 

with good prognosis.

Follow-up results: After being discharged from the hospital, all patients were
remained in quarantine at designated sites for a -day medical observation and then
sent for home confinement for another two weeks. At the time of writing, the median
follow-up period of patients in this study was . (-) days. No convalescent
patients discharged from hospital showed clinical manifestation during the study

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

period, but  of the  cases with prolonged fecal shedding of SARS-CoV- were still
positive for RT-PCR analysis till the last day of follow-up.

Discussion
The newly issued Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease
  pointed out the attack rate in individuals under  years of age was only .%
and no death was reported in this age group. According to the data released by China
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC),   cases were reported
among children  years old and younger with no death case, which accounted for .%
of total COVID- cases. Data from local health authorities showed the attack rate
among children ranged from .% to .%. ,  Evidence so far implied that children
are less severely affected by COVID-, which resembles that of SARS emerged 
years ago.  Familial cluster is one of the common features of COVID- in children.
, , , 

Among the  pediatric cases included in this study,  had complete

exposure history recorded and  (.%) were household contacts of adults whose
symptoms developed earlier. There has been no evidence showing the virus was
transmitted from children to others. However, the relatively low attack rate of
COVID- in children might be explained by the stringent implementation of home
confinement and nation-wide school closure as required by the Chinese governments.
During the outbreak, public activities were discouraged, and children spent most of
their days at home with strengthened protection from caregivers.
This study included clinical, laboratory, treatment, and outcome data of 
pediatric cases of COVID- from two children’s hospitals within and beyond
epidemic center (from southern China and northern China, respectively). All patients
were discharged from the hospital after recovery and were followed up for  days.
Clinical presentations of infected children were distinct from that of adult patients.
Except for one critically ill patient,  (.%) cases were asymptomatic carriers of
SARS-CoV-,  (.%) were mild to moderate cases with various manifestations.
Among adult patients, fever (.%-.%) and cough (.%-.%) were the most
common and predominant symptoms.

-

Whereas fever and mild cough only

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

accounted for .% and .%, respectively, of symptoms at disease onset and
during hospitalization in our pediatric patients, a proportion much lower than that of
adult patients. Additionally, fatigue, headache, nausea, and gastrointestinal symptoms
were not common among infected children. Nearly half of the children were not
admitted to hospital for symptoms; they were found SARS-CoV- positive for
RT-PCR analysis during quarantine after family members had been diagnosed with
COVID-.
Laboratory findings of pediatric patients were also different from adult patients.
Previous studies have shown leukopenia, lymphopenia, and increased serum levels of
CRP in majority of adult patients.

-

Only one third of the  pediatric cases in our

study had abnormal leukocyte and/or lymphocyte counts, among whom  (.%)
had increased and  (.%) had decreased number of leukocytes;  (.%) had
elevated and  (.%) had reduced lymphocytes. Moreover, magnitude of these
abnormalities in leukocytes and lymphocytes was relatively small without typical
changes. Given that children under  years of age have higher lymphocyte counts than
adults, further consideration would be warranted for evaluation of these indexes.
There was no pattern for the changes in other infection-related variables such as CRP,
PCR and ESR.
Typical radiologic changes in adult COVID- patients include multifocal areas
of ground glass shadows and infiltration in both lungs, and dynamic changes could be
observed as the disease progresses. Abnormalities in lung imaging could be served as
one of the criteria for assessment of disease severity and prognosis according to the
Trial Guideline for Diagnosis and Treatment of COVID- (tentative fifth & sixth &
seventh edition) issued by the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic
of China. , ,  However, pediatric cases of COVID- lacked the typical changes in
chest imaging.



Among the  cases in this study, only  (.%) of the  cases

who showed abnormalities in CT imaging developed into ground glass opacity;
whereas the rest  cases only showed atypical changes for bronchopneumonia and
common viral pneumonia. Nearly half of the cases did not show any Radiologic
changes during course of the disease.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

The exact reason for why children are less severely affected is still unclear. One
possible explanation is related to children’s immature immune system. Their adaptive
immunity is less developed to mount an inflammatory response during immune
dysregulation phase induced by viral infection.



Relatively stronger humoral

responses in children may also contribute to this phenomenon. Innate immunity is
able to react more rapidly in response to pathogen invasion than adaptive immunity.
Moreover, children generally have fewer comorbidities, making them more resilient
to SARS-CoV- infection. Most pediatric patients had relatively mild disease with
good prognosis, which could also be observed in children infected with SARS-CoV
and other respiratory viruses. Compared with pediatric patients, mortality rate of
seasonal flu in adults is nearly  times higher.



Several studies have shown that

children with SARS only presented with fever, cough and nasal congestion, and
seldom developed into the third phase of SARS (characterized by acute respiratory
distress syndrome). Accordingly, it is difficult to distinguish children with SARS from
infection with other common respiratory viruses.

-

Non-specific clinical,

Radiologic and laboratory characteristics of children with SARS-CoV- infection
making them hard to be recognized, raising the possibility of misdetection of
asymptomatic carriers. A comprehensive evaluation of epidemiological exposure and
nucleic acid testing results would be warranted to guide clinical decision making.
More attention should be drawn to children with COVID- who also have
co-infection with other common respiratory pathogens. Among the  pediatric
patients included in this study,  (.%) of the  children who had testing results
for common respiratory pathogens had co-infection;  (.%) children had two or
more pathogens other than SARS-CoV- detected. This finding was consistent with
our previous observation and also in line with studies of others.

, 

It can be seen

that co-infection is common in children with COVID-, indicating SARS-CoV-
screening is necessary to identify COVID- cases, especially during the peak season
for colds, influenza and other respiratory ailments.
With the accumulating experience of COVID- management in China, an
increasing number of studies have reported positive RT-PCR results for fecal

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

SARS-CoV- detection or isolation of viable virus from excretions.

, 

Xiao and

colleagues demonstrated that viral RNA could exist in stools of COVID- patients
for  days or longer.



Previously we found that RT-PCR testing results for

SARS-CoV- remained positive in feces of three pediatric patients for approximately
 weeks, a duration much longer than that of respiratory specimens (about  weeks).


Here we simultaneously conducted nucleic acid testing in nasopharynx swabs and

fecal specimens for  of the  pediatric patients and all of them had positive results
in both samples. Eight children had fecal SARS-CoV- positive for RT-PCR analysis
after negative conversion of viral RNA in respiratory specimens. At the time of
writing, three children still had fecal RNA detectable and the longest lagged behind
for  days. SARS-CoV- may present in gastrointestinal tract for a longer time than
respiratory system, which appears to be more common among pediatric patients.
However, there is limited data on comparison with adult patients. Detection of viral
RNA in feces of convalescent patients does not necessarily mean that the virus are
replication-competent nor infectious enough to be transmitted. There is still a
possibility of fecal-oral transmission. The emerging disease brings new challenges to
preparedness response and prophylactic control, in particular, massive efforts should
be made at all levels to minimize spread of the virus among children after reopening
of kindergartens and schools.
Personalized management should be considered for pediatric patients with
COVID-, more precisely, to symptomatic and asymptomatic carriers of
SARS-CoV- who come from families with a cluster of infection. Treatment plan
should also be tailored for children.



Anti-symptomatic therapies including

administration of antipyretics and anti-viral agents, inhalation of interferon, and
enhanced nutrition support were given to children with fever and pneumonia. Only
one critically ill case was given low dose of systemic corticosteroid in a short period
of time. Over half of the pediatric patients were merely under close surveillance and
quarantine and none of them had worsening of symptoms. The most ‘severe’ symptom
during their hospitalization and medical observation was the one at onset of the illness.
More investigations are needed to determine the standardized treatment for pediatric

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

patients with typical COVID- symptoms and to evaluate the efficacy of traditional
Chinese medicine in children.

Limitations
The rapidly evolving COVID- outbreak and the lack of specific containment
measures in the early stage caused panic in the community and hospitals. In such
cases, we failed to collect the complete epidemiological information from  patients
due. Only blood routine, biochemical and infection-related biomarkers were analyzed
in this study due to the different standards for laboratory testing between the two
hospitals. We were unable to measure the viral loads, or to detect presence of
SARS-CoV- in nasopharynx swabs and fecal specimens for all of our patients. We
only screened common respiratory pathogens for children who were admitted to
hospitals in the later stage. But we believe these  cases with complete medical
records during hospitalization and follow-up period represented a certain proportion
of pediatric patients of COVID- in China.

Contributors
YW, W-DW and Q-SX had full access to all the data in the study and took
responsibility for the integrity of and the accuracy of the data. YW, W-DW, Q-SX,
QW, LS and Q-SX designed the study and conceptualized the paper. QW and LS
collected the epidemiological, clinical, laboratory and radiological data. W-JL, YG
and S-LP contributed to laboratory testing. LS and Q-SX summarized the data. QW,
LS, Y-HX and Q-SX wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. All authors provided
critical feedback and approved the final version.

Declaration of Interests
All authors declare no competing interests.

Role of the Funder/Sponsor:
The funders had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval
of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication.

Acknowledgements:
This work was funded by The National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
[Grant number ], Distinguished Taishan Scholars (), Qingdao
Outstanding Young Health Professional Development Fund () and Qingdao
People's Livelihood Science and Technology Program(----nsh). We thank all
patients and their families involved in the study. We thank all healthcare workers
involved in the diagnosis and treatment of patients.

References
. World

Health

Orgnization.

https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/dacefabeeeeebcd.
(Accessed March th, ).
. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 
novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The Lancet ; (): -.
. Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of
 cases of  novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive
study. The Lancet ; (): -.
. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, et al. Clinical characteristics of  hospitalized patients
with  novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia in Wuhan, China. Jama .
. Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y, et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease
 in China. The New England journal of medicine .
. Yu P, Zhu J, Zhang Z, Han Y, Huang L. A familial cluster of infection associated
with the  novel coronavirus indicating potential person-to-person
transmission during the incubation period. The Journal of infectious diseases
.
. Cai J, Wang X, Ge Y, et al. First case of  novel coronavirus infection in
children in Shanghai. Zhonghua er ke za zhi= Chinese journal of pediatrics ;

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

: E.
. Chen F, Liu Z, Zhang F, et al. Frist case of severe childhood novel coronavirus
pneumonia in China. Zhonghua er ke za zhi= Chinese journal of pediatrics ;
: E.
. Zhang Y, Lin D, Xiao M, et al. -novel coronavirus infection in a
three-month-old baby. Zhonghua er ke za zhi= Chinese journal of pediatrics ;
: E.
. Wei M, Yuan J, Liu Y, Fu T, Yu X, Zhang Z-J. Novel coronavirus infection in
hospitalized infants under  year of age in China. Jama .
. Wang D, Ju X, Xie F, et al. Clinical analysis of  cases of  novel
coronavirus infection in children from six provinces (autonomous region) of
northern China. Zhonghua er ke za zhi= Chinese journal of pediatrics ;
(): E.
. Organization WH. Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection
when novel coronavirus (-nCoV) infection is suspected: interim guidance.
Organization

WH

.

https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/clinical-management-of-n
ovel-cov.pdf. (accessed January , ).
. Shen K, Yang Y, Wang T, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of 
novel coronavirus infection in children: experts’ consensus statement. World
Journal of Pediatrics : -.
. National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China. Diagnosis and
Treatment Plan of Corona Virus Disease  (tentative fifth edition)..
http://www.nhc.gov.cn/yzygj/sp//bbacbadbbd
.shtml. (accessed February th, ).
. National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China. Diagnosis and
Treatment Plan of Corona Virus Disease  (tentative sixth edition)..
http://www.nhc.gov.cn/yzygj/sp//addddfddaaef
c.shtml. (accessed February th, ).
. WHO-China Joint Mission on COVID-. Report of the WHO-China Joint

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

Mission on Coronavirus Disease  (COVID-). WHO-China Joint Mission
on COVID-. February - .
. Team. NCPERE. The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 
novel coronavirus diseases (COVID-) in China. Chin J Epidemiol ; ():
-.
. Guangzhou

municipal

health

commission.

http://wjw.gz.gov.cn/ztzl/xxfyyqfk/yqtb/content/post_.html. (accessed 
february ).
. Shenzhen

municipal

health

commission.

http://www.sz.gov.cn/szzt/yqfk/szzxd/content/post_.html.
(accessed  february ).
. Liang WN MJIB, Joint Leadership Group of SARS Prevention and Control in
Beijing. Epidemiological features of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Beijing.
Chin J Epidemiol ; (): -.
. Zeng LK, Tao XW, Yuan WH, Wang J, Liu X, Liu ZS. [First case of neonate
infected with novel coronavirus pneumonia in China]. Zhonghua er ke za zhi =
Chinese journal of pediatrics ; (): E.
. National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China. Diagnosis and
Treatment Plan of Corona Virus Disease  (tentative seventh edition).
National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China. .
http://www.nhc.gov.cn/yzygj/sp//cadfecefdcfeb
.shtml. (accessed March th, ).
. Ygberg S, Nilsson A. The developing immune system - from foetus to toddler.
Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway : ) ; (): -.
. Rosano A, Bella A, Gesualdo F, et al. Investigating the impact of influenza on
excess mortality in all ages in Italy during recent seasons (/-/
seasons). International journal of infectious diseases : IJID : official publication
of the International Society for Infectious Diseases ; : -.
. Hon KL, Leung CW, Cheng WT, et al. Clinical presentations and outcome of
severe acute respiratory syndrome in children. Lancet (London, England) ;

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

(): -.
. Chiu WK, Cheung PC, Ng KL, et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome in
children: experience in a regional hospital in Hong Kong. Pediatric critical care
medicine : a journal of the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the World
Federation of Pediatric Intensive and Critical Care Societies ; (): -.
. Bitnun A, Allen U, Heurter H, et al. Children hospitalized with severe acute
respiratory syndrome-related illness in Toronto. Pediatrics ; (): e.
. Xing Q, Li G, Xing Y, et al. Precautions are Needed for COVID- Patients with
Coinfection

of

Common

Respiratory

Pathogens.

medRxiv.

:....
. Ai JW, Zhang HC, Xu T, et al. Optimizing diagnostic strategy for novel
coronavirus pneumonia, a multi-center study in Eastern China. medRxiv.
....
. Xiao F, Tang M, Zheng X, et al. Evidence for gastrointestinal infection of
SARSCoV-. medRxiv. :....
. Novel coronavirus isolated from feces by Chinese Academy of Engineering
academicians Dr. Zhong Nanshan and Dr. Li Lanjuan. Xinhuanet. .
http://www.hb.xinhuanet.com/-//c_.htm

(acccessed

february rd, ).
. Xing YH, Ni W, Wu Q, et al. Prolonged presence of SARS-CoV- in feces of
pediatric patients during the convalescent phase. medRxiv. ....
. Cai J, Xu J, Lin D, et al. A Case Series of children with  novel coronavirus
infection: clinical and epidemiological features. Clinical infectious diseases : an
official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America .

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

Figure legends:
Figure . Timeline of COVID- cases after onset of illness. The interval time was
expressed as median with interquartile.
Figure . Chest CT images from a -year-old boy showed ground glass opacity near
the pleura of the lower lobe of right lung on day  after symptom onset (A) and the
lesion almost was absorbed after  day’s treatment (B).
Figure . Chest CT images from a -year-old girl showed bilateral nonspecific
multiple patches along the bronchovascular bundle on day  after symptom onset (A)
and the lesion was absorbed after  day’s treatment (B).
Figure . Chest CT images from the severe patient of a -year-old boy showed
bilateral nonspecific multi-patchy consolidation opacity near the pleura on day  after
symptom onset (A) and the lesion was absorbed after  day’s treatment (B).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

Table . Basic and clinical characteristics of the study children infected with SARS-CoV-,the
data are expressed as n (%) or median (range).
Basic Characteristics
Gender (F/M)
Age, y
≤months

No (percentage)/median (range)
 (.%) / (.%)
. (.-.)
 (.%)

<age≤ months

 (.%)

<age≤ months
<age≤ years

 (.%)
 (.%)

<age≤ years

 (.%)

Age> years
Weight (kg)
Symptoms at onset
Cough
Fever
Temperature, , n=

≤.
.-.
>.

 (.%)
. (.-.)
 (.%)
 (.%)
 (.%)
. (.-.)
 (.%)
 (.%)
 (.%)

Fatigue
Chest congestion

 (.%)
 (.%)

Anorexia

 (.%)

Diarrhea
Dyspnea

 (.%)
 (.%)

Headache

 (.%)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND . International license .

Expectoration

(.%)

Myalgia
Pharyngalgia
Dizziness





Myalgia



Clustering of the symptoms


 (.%)
 (.%)

≥
Laboratory findings
White blood cell count, ×/L
- months
 months- years

. (.-.)
. (.-.)

≥ years

. (.-.)

Lymphocyte, ×/L
- months

. (.-.)

 months- years
≥ years
CRP, mg/L

. (.-.)
. (.-.)
.(.-.)

abnormal
PCT, ug/L

 (.)
.(.-.)

abnormal

 (.%)

ESR, mm/h
abnormal

 (-)

Co-infection

 (/, .%)

 (/, .%)

mycoplasma

 (.%)

RSV

 (.%)

EBV

 (.%)

CMV

 (.%)

influenza A&B

 (.%)

CRP: C-reactive protein, PCT: procalcitonin, ESR: erythrocyte sedimentation rate, RSV:
respiratory syncytial virus, EBV: Epstein-Barr virus, CMV: cytomegalovirus.

