Feng He

ORCID iD: ---

Coronavirus Disease  (COVID-): What we know?

Accepted Article

Feng He Yu Deng Weina Li
 Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
 Department and Institute of Infectious Disease, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
Corresponding Author: Weina Li, Department and Institute of Infectious Disease,
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China. Telephone: +--; Email:
weina_li@live.cn
Shortened Title: COVID-: What we know?
Abstract
In late December , a cluster of unexplained pneumonia cases has been
reported in Wuhan, China. A few days later, the causative agent of this mysterious
pneumonia was identified as a novel coronavirus. This causative virus has been
temporarily named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
(SARS-CoV-) and the relevant infected disease has been named as coronavirus
disease  (COVID-) by the World Health Organization respectively. The
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but
has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading
process, which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of
Record. Please cite this article as doi: ./jmv..

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

COVID- epidemic is spreading in China and all over the world now. The
purpose of this review is primarily to review the pathogen, clinical features,
diagnosis, and treatment of COVID-, but also to comment briefly on the

Accepted Article

epidemiology and pathology based on the current evidences.
KeyWords: SARS-CoV-; COVID-; coronavirus
Conflict of interest
The authors disclose no conflicts of interest.
Introduction
In late December , an outbreak of an unknown disease called pneumonia of
unknown cause occurred in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. The outbreak has
spread substantial to infect  people in China with  deaths and to infect 
people in  other countries up to January , 
(https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/
-sitrep--ncov.pdf). A few days later, the causative agent of this mysterious
pneumonia was identified as a novel coronavirus by several independent
laboratories-. The causative virus has been temporarily named as severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus  (SARS-CoV-) and the relevant infected
disease has been named as coronavirus disease  (COVID-) by the World
Health Organization respectively. According to the daily report of the World
Health Organization, the epidemic of SARS-CoV- so far registered  cases
and  deaths in China, spread to  other countries that reported a total of
 cases by February , 
(https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/
-sitrep--covid-.pdf). COVID- epidemic has become a global health threat.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Coronaviruses are a group of highly diverse, enveloped, positive-sense,
single-stranded RNA viruses. They cause several diseases involving respiratory,
enteric, hepatic and neurological systems with vary severity among humans and

Accepted Article

animals,. Human coronavirus (CoV) infections have traditionally caused a low
percentage of annual respiratory infections. There are HCoV-OC, HCoV-E,
HCoV-NL and HCoV-HKU, which cause mild respiratory illness,. Over the
past two decades, two novel coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome
CoV (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome CoV (MERS-CoV),
have emerged and cause severe human diseases,. During the epidemic,
SARS-CoV infect more than  people worldwide with nearly  fatalities,
representing its mortality rate around %. Whereas MERS-CoV infected over
 official cases and  deaths, making its mortality rate approximately
%-. So far, SARS-CoV- is the seventh member of the family of
coronaviruses that infects humans. The main symptoms of COVID- included
fever, fatigue, and cough, which are similar to that of SARS-CoV and
MERS-CoV infected cases. There are some overlapping and discrete aspects of
the pathology and pathogenesis of these coronaviruses which cause severe
diseases in humans.
Many literatures reported the clinical features, virology, pathology and radiology
of COVID-, but the comprehensive review is few. The purpose of this review is
primarily to review the pathogen, clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of
COVID-, but also to comment briefly on the epidemiology and pathology based
on the current evidences.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

The pathogen
The pathogen that causes COVID- is a novel coronavirus that was first
identified in the late January , named SARS-CoV- (also known as

Accepted Article

-nCoV)-.
SARS-CoV- is a novel member of coronaviruses, which are a large group of
highly diverse, enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses. Recent
research reported that SARS-CoV- likely originated in bats, based on the
similarity of its genetic sequence to that of other coronaviruses. The intermediate
animal host of SARS-CoV- between a probable bat reservoir and humans is still
unknown. Although this novel coronavirus has genetic features that are
compatible with the family of coronavirus, nevertheless it has distinct gene
sequences that are significantly different from previously sequenced coronaviruses
(Table ). The analysis of samples from seven SARS-CoV- infected patients
suggested that SARS-CoV- shares .% sequence identity to SARS-CoV.
Simplot analysis showed that SARS-CoV- share .% overall genome sequence
identity to RaTG, which is a short RdRp region from a bat coronavirus.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that SARS-CoV- falls into the subgenus
Sarbecovirus of the genus Betacoronavirus and is distinct from SARS-CoV,.
The envelope spike (S) protein is important for coronavirus. The S protein
mediates receptor binding and membrane fusion and is crucial for determining
host tropism and transmission capacity-. Generally, the S protein is
functionally divided into the S domain, responsible for receptor binding, and S
domain, responsible for cell membrane fusion. Structure analysis suggested that
receptor-binding domain was composed of a core and an external subdomain.
Angiotensin converting enzyme II (ACE) was known as cell receptor for
SARS-CoV-. Similar to SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV- also use ACE as an entry
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

receptor in the ACE-expressing cells, indicating SARS-CoV- may share the
same life cycle with SARS-CoV (Figure ).
The biophysical and structural analysis indicated that S protein of SARS-CoV-

Accepted Article

binds ACE with approximately- to - fold higher affinity than S protein of
SARS-CoV. The high affinity of S protein for human ACE may facilitate the
spread of SARS-CoV- in human populations. Meanwhile, SARS-CoV- does not
use other coronavirus receptors, such as aminopeptidase N and dipeptidyl
peptidase  (DPP) to enter cells.
Epidemiology
Briefly, cases tend to be in clusters which arrive in waves, and develop into larger
outbreaks all over the world. The first documented outbreak occurred primarily in
Wuhan, China. According to the daily report of the World Health Organization,
the epidemic of SARS-CoV- so far registered  cases and  deaths in
China, spread to  other countries that reported a total of  cases by February
th, .
There are evidences suggest that transmission mode is human to human,. The
major route of transmission of COVID- is droplet and close contact. Whether
infection can occur through the oral or conjunctival routes is unknown, but
SARS-CoV- has been detected in tears, which is resemble to SARS-CoV.
Reproductive number (R) was estimated by some studies. Based on the clinical
data of patients in COVID- early outbreak, the mean R was ranging from .
to ., meaning that each patient has been spreading infection to  or  other
people,. It is still too early to develop an accurate R estimate or to assess the
dynamics of transmission. More research is needed in the future.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

The mean incubation period is about  days, ranging from - days and % of
patients are likely to experience symptoms within . days of contact,. These
data suggest a -day medical observation period or quarantine for exposed and

Accepted Article

close contact persons. However, an asymptomatic carrier was reported and the
incubation period was  days, suggesting the complicated challenge to contain
the outbreak.
Clinical features
Most case patients were - years of age. The median age is ranging from 
to  years,,,. There were few cases in children below  years of age. More
than half the patients were male. Nearly half the cases had one or more coexisting
medical conditions, such as hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular
disease,,,. A large cases study indicated that the case-fatality rate was
elevated among those patients with coexisting medical conditions.
The spectrum of clinical presentations of COVID- have been reported ranging
from asymptomatic infection to severe respiratory failure,,,-. The main
symptoms include a self-reported fever, fatigue, dry cough, myalgia, and dyspnea.
The uncommon symptoms include sputum production, headache, hemoptysis and
diarrhea,,,-. Although pneumonia is present in most SARS-CoV- infected
patients, few cases complained of pleuritic chest pain,.
According to the severity of symptoms, patients can be classified as mild, severe,
and critical types(Table ). Mild patients had nonpneumonia or mild pneumonia.
Severe patients had several clinical findings, including dyspnea, respiratory
frequency ≥ /min, blood oxygen saturation ≤ %, partial pressure of arterial
oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio < , and/or lung infiltrates >%
within  to  hours. Critical patients had severe conditions, such as respiratory
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction or failure. If the disease
progressed, the median duration period from illness onset to dyspnea was .
days, and to mechanical ventilation was . days.

Accepted Article

Common clinical laboratory findings include leucopenia and
lymphopenia,,,. Lymphopenia is a cardinal feature of COVID-. Lactate
dehydrogenase, and creatinine kinase are all elevated. Half of patients had
abnormal liver function, with elevated alanine aminotransferase or aspartate
aminotransferase. Most patients had abnormal myocardial zymogram, which
showed the elevation of creatine kinase and lactate dehydrogenase. Most patients
showed normal serum levels of procalcitonim, but the C-reactive protein was
above the normal range. One third of patients had the elevation of
D-dimer,,,.
One study investigated the changes of several cytokines in serum in the
COVID- patients. Initial plasma ILB, ILRA, IL, IL, IL, IL, basic
FGF, GCSF, GMCSF, IFNγ, IP, MCP, MIPA, MIPB, PDGF, TNFα, and
VEGF concentrations were higher in patients than in healthy adults. Plasma levels
of IL, ILp, IL, Eotaxin, and RANTES were similar between patients and
healthy adults. Further comparison between intensive care unit (ICU) and
non-ICU patients showed that plasma concentrations of IL, IL, IL, GCSF,
IP, MCP, MIPA, and TNFα were higher in ICU patients than non-ICU
patients. These findings suggested that the initiation of the immune response
result in the production of chemokines and cytokines, which damage normal host
lung.
The radiologic manifestations of SARS-CoV- infected patients are diverse and
progressing rapidly-. Two third of patients had at least two affected lobes,
nearly half of patients had five affected lobes,. The most common
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

manifestations are patchy ground glass opacities (GGO) and patchy consolidation
which were mainly distributed in the middle and outer zone of the lung,
(Figure ). A little fibrous stripe may appear if the condition was improved. One

Accepted Article

report suggested that there are four stages defined on CT scan. In early stage,
GGO was the main radiological demonstration distributed in the lower lobes
unilaterally or bilaterally. In progressive stage, diffuse and bilateral GGO and
consolidation in more than two lobes became the main manifestation. In peak
stage, the diffuse GGO and dense consolidation became more prevalent. In
absorption stage, extensive GGO could be observed and the consolidation was
gradually absorbed.
Pathology
The pathological findings of human SARS-CoV- infection have been limited due
to the rare number of biopsies or autopsies. In a case reported by Xu et al. a
-year old man died  days after admission due to respiratory failure and
cardiac arrest. The primary finding of biopsy at autopsy was bilateral diffuse
alveolar damage with cellular fibromyxoid exudates and interstitial mononuclear
inflammatory infiltrates dominated by lymphocytes. Multinucleated syncytial cells
with atypical enlarged pneumocytes characterized by large nuclei, amphophilic
granular cytoplasm, and prominent nucleoli were identified in the intraalveolar
spaces, showing viral cytopathic-like changes. No obvious intranuclear or
intracytoplasmic viral inclusions were identified. These pathological features
show great similarities to SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infection-. In addition,
liver and heart were studied. There is moderate microvascular steatosis and mild
lobular and portal activity in the liver tissue and a few interstitial mononuclear
inflammatory infiltrates in the heart tissue.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Diagnosis
Although a good contact history, systemic symptoms, and radiographic changes of
pneumonia make the diagnosis likely, the laboratory diagnosis is more reliable.

Accepted Article

RT-PCR is routinely used to detect causative viruses from respiratory
secretions,. During COVID- transmission events, RT-PCR has served as the
primary clinical laboratory diagnostic test,,,. Success of these tests are very
important to understand the viral kinetics and tissue tropism found in COVID-
cases. Several specific and sensitive assays targeting RdRP, N, and E genes of the
SARS-CoV- genome were designed to detect viral RNA in clinical specimens.
Lower respiratory tract samples provide the higher viral loads. The sampling
source or operation may affect RT-PCR testing results.
The positive rate of RT-PCR for throat swab samples was reported to be about
% in early stage of COVID-. These findings suggested that the result of
RT-PCR should be interpret with caution. One study investigated the diagnostic
value and consistency of chest CT compared with RT-PCR test in  patients
with suspected SARS-CoV- infection. The results suggest that the sensitivity of
chest CT in suspected patients was % based on positive RT-PCR result and
% based on negative RT-PCR results. These findings indicated that chest CT is
a sensitive modality to detect SARS-CoV- infection.
During the COVID- epidemic in China,  patients were diagnosed as
clinical diagnosed cases. This designation is being used in Hubei Province, where
is the worst affected area in China. In these cases, no RT-PCR test was performed
but diagnosis was made based on typical symptoms, exposure history, and chest
CT manifestations consistent with COVID- pneumonia. Under this criteria,
 cases were diagnosed and isolated. This strategy quarantined a large
number of suspected people and protected the healthy people to the most extent.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Based on the experiences above, we strongly recommend that the criteria of
clinical diagnosed cases based on the symptoms, exposure history and typical
manifestations on chest CT imaging should be used in COVID- affected areas

Accepted Article

that are in shortage of RT-PCR testing kits to control the COVID- epidemic.
Treatment
Until the diagnosis is confirmed, SARS-CoV- infected patients are treated in
single rooms,.As SARS-CoV- is an emerging virus, an effective antiviral
treatment has not been identified. The main treatment of COVID- is
symptomatic treatment. The antiviral drugs, including oseltamivir, ribavirin,
ganciclovir, lopinavir, and ritonavir have been used in attempts to reduce viral
load and to prevent the likelihood of respiratory complications in several
studies,,,,. Remdesivir was reported in the treatment of a patient with
COVID- in the United States and got an effective result. However, the
efficacy of these antiviral drugs for COVID- need to be verified by randomized,
controlled clinical trials.
The antibiotics used generally covered common pathogens and some atypical
pathogens. When secondary bacterial infection occurred, medication was
administered according to the results of bacterial culture and drug sensitivity.
Current evidence in patients with SARS and MERS suggests that receiving
corticosteroids did not have a survival benefit, but rather delayed viral
clearance-. Therefore, routine corticosteroids should be avoided unless they are
indicated for other reason. Arbidol is used empirically in China because of its
direct antiviral effect on SARS-CoV in cell culture. Chinese herbal medicine
formulae are used to prevent SARS-CoV- infection in  provinces in China.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Noninvasive or mechanical ventilation should be considered in patients with
hypoxia despite oxygen supplement and worsening shortness of breath.
Extrcorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is used as a last resort,,.

Accepted Article

Prognosis
As of February , , a total of  deaths in China and  deaths outside of
China have been reported. The number of laboratory-confirmed cases and deaths
continues to rise. The current reported mortality for COVID- is approximately
.% compared with % for SARS and % for MERS-,. The mortality
rate was higher than .% in Iran and France, lower in Italy, Japan, Republic of
Korea, and United States (Figure ). Considering the quick spread of COVID-,
It is still too early to assess the mortality. All countries in the world should
respond to the epidemic effectively. Approximately % to % SARS-CoV-
infected patients developed ARDS and required ICU care,,. Current evidence
indicated that older age and comorbidity may be risk factors for poor outcome.
Summary and outlook
This review summarizes the current findings of SARS-CoV- along with the
treatment for this severe coronavirus infection. The most common symptoms were
addressed. Due to the only biopsy report, the pathological findings associated with
SARS-CoV- infection have been limited. Autopsy is warranted and valuable for
future research.
The WHO issued a public health emergency of international concern on January
, . SARS-CoV- epidemic is becoming a global concern. At the moment
there is no vaccine and no specific treatment for COVID-. The best strategy to
deal with SARS-CoV- epidemic includes controlling the sources of infection,
protecting the susceptible people, and cutting off the transmission. The infected
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

patients should be identified early by rapid and robust detection technologies,
provided with optimized treatment in isolation timely. The close contact people
should be quarantined with follow-up. The healthy people should be aware of the

Accepted Article

severity of COVID- and take measures to protect themselves, such as staying at
home, limiting social contacts, and wearing protective mask in public. The
authorities should encourage people to stay at home; discourage mass gathering;
postpone or cancel public events; and close public institutions. These control
measures will help COVID- infected countries to prevent the epidemic
effectively. Future research will focus on improving the accuracy of early
diagnostic tests, developing the vaccine and identifying effective drugs. Therefore,
elucidating the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV- infection is imperative for achieving
such goals.
Figures
Figure  Schematic model of SARS-CoV- life cycle. S protein binds to the
cellular receptor ACE to facilitate the entry of the virus. After the fusion of viral and
plasma membranes, virus RNA undergoes replication and transcription. The proteins are
synthesized. Viral proteins and new RNA genome are subsequently assembled in the
ER and Golgi, followed by budding into the lumen of the ERGIC. New virions are
released through vesicles. ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme ; ER, endoplasmic
reticulum; ERGIC, endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi intermediate compartment.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Figure  Chest CT Manifestations of COVID-. (a) single GGO; (b) diffuse

Accepted Article

GGO; (c) consolidation; (c) both GGO and consolidation.

Figure  Mortality rates of different countries or regions,  February .

*A cruise ship currently in Japanese territorial waters.
Acknowledgement
We thank all the doctors and nurses who fight the virus during the COVID-
epidemic bravely.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Reference
.

Report of clustering pneumonia of unknown etiology in Wuhan City. Wuhan Municipal
Health Commission.
:(http://wjw.wuhan.gov.cn/front/web/showDetail/).

Accepted Article

.

Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, et al. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of  novel
coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet.
;():-.

.

Zhou P, Yang XL, Wang XG, et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new
coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature. .

.

Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, et al. A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in
China, . N Engl J Med. ;():-.

.

Zumla A, Chan JF, Azhar EI, Hui DS, Yuen KY. Coronaviruses - drug discovery and
therapeutic options. Nat Rev Drug Discov. ;():-.

.

Chan JF, Lau SK, Woo PC. The emerging novel Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus: the "knowns" and "unknowns". J Formos Med Assoc. ;():-.

.

Channappanavar R, Zhao J, Perlman S. T cell-mediated immune response to respiratory
coronaviruses. Immunol Res. ;(-):-.

.

Cheng VC, Lau SK, Woo PC, Yuen KY. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
as an agent of emerging and reemerging infection. Clin Microbiol Rev.
;():-.

.

Chan JF, Lau SK, To KK, Cheng VC, Woo PC, Yuen KY. Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus: another zoonotic betacoronavirus causing SARS-like disease. Clin
Microbiol Rev. ;():-.

.

Gretebeck LM, Subbarao K. Animal models for SARS and MERS coronaviruses. Curr
Opin Virol. ;:-.

.

Gralinski LE, Baric RS. Molecular pathology of emerging coronavirus infections. J
Pathol. ;():-.

.

Drosten C, Gunther S, Preiser W, et al. Identification of a novel coronavirus in patients
with severe acute respiratory syndrome. N Engl J Med. ;():-.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

.

Liu J, Zheng X, Tong Q, et al. Overlapping and discrete aspects of the pathology and
pathogenesis of the emerging human pathogenic coronaviruses SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV,
and -nCoV. J Med Virol. .

.

Zhou P, Yang X-L, Wang X-G, et al. Discovery of a novel coronavirus associated with
the recent pneumonia outbreak in humans and its potential bat origin.

Accepted Article

:....
.

Li X, Zai J, Zhao Q, et al. Evolutionary history, potential intermediate animal host, and
cross-species analyses of SARS-CoV-. J Med Virol. .

.

Du L, He Y, Zhou Y, Liu S, Zheng BJ, Jiang S. The spike protein of SARS-CoV--a target
for vaccine and therapeutic development. Nat Rev Microbiol. ;():-.

.

Wang Q, Wong G, Lu G, Yan J, Gao GF. MERS-CoV spike protein: Targets for vaccines
and therapeutics. Antiviral Res. ;:-.

.

Lu G, Wang Q, Gao GF. Bat-to-human: spike features determining 'host jump' of
coronaviruses SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and beyond. Trends Microbiol.
;():-.

.

Li F. Structure, Function, and Evolution of Coronavirus Spike Proteins. Annu Rev Virol.
;():-.

.

He Y, Zhou Y, Liu S, et al. Receptor-binding domain of SARS-CoV spike protein
induces highly potent neutralizing antibodies: implication for developing subunit vaccine.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. ;():-.

.

Oudit GY, Kassiri Z, Jiang C, et al. SARS-coronavirus modulation of myocardial ACE
expression and inflammation in patients with SARS. Eur J Clin Invest.
;():-.

.

Li W, Moore MJ, Vasilieva N, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme  is a functional
receptor for the SARS coronavirus. Nature. ;():-.

.

Kuba K, Imai Y, Rao S, et al. A crucial role of angiotensin converting enzyme  (ACE)
in SARS coronavirus-induced lung injury. Nat Med. ;():-.

.

Wrapp D, Wang N, Corbett KS, et al. Cryo-EM structure of the -nCoV spike in the
prefusion conformation. Science. .

.

Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, et al. Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel
Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia. N Engl J Med. .

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

.

Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok KH, et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the
 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family
cluster. Lancet. ;():-.

.

Xia J, Tong J, Liu M, Shen Y, Guo D. Evaluation of coronavirus in tears and conjunctival

Accepted Article

secretions of patients with SARS-CoV- infection. J Med Virol. .
.

Loon SC, Teoh SC, Oon LL, et al. The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus in
tears. Br J Ophthalmol. ;():-.

.

Zhao S, Lin Q, Ran J, et al. Preliminary estimation of the basic reproduction number of
novel coronavirus (-nCoV) in China, from  to : A data-driven analysis in
the early phase of the outbreak. Int J Infect Dis. ;:-.

.

Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, et al. Clinical Characteristics of  Hospitalized Patients With
 Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA. .

.

Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, et al. Presumed Asymptomatic Carrier Transmission of COVID-.
JAMA. .

.

Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the Coronavirus
Disease  (COVID-) Outbreak in China: Summary of a Report of  Cases
From the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. JAMA. .

.

Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of  cases
of  novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet.
;():-.

.

Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with  novel
coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. ;():-.

.

Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, et al. Correlation of Chest CT and RT-PCR Testing in Coronavirus
Disease  (COVID-) in China: A Report of  Cases. Radiology. :.

.

Pan F, Ye T, Sun P, et al. Time Course of Lung Changes On Chest CT During Recovery
From  Novel Coronavirus (COVID-) Pneumonia. Radiology. :.

.

Pan Y, Guan H, Zhou S, et al. Initial CT findings and temporal changes in patients with
the novel coronavirus pneumonia (-nCoV): a study of  patients in Wuhan, China.
Eur Radiol. .

.

Shi H, Han X, Jiang N, et al. Radiological findings from  patients with COVID-
pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet Infect Dis. .

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

.

Xu Z, Shi L, Wang Y, et al. Pathological findings of COVID- associated with acute
respiratory distress syndrome. Lancet Respir Med. .

.

Hui DSC, Zumla A. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome: Historical, Epidemiologic, and
Clinical Features. Infect Dis Clin North Am. ;():-.

Accepted Article

.

van den Brand JM, Smits SL, Haagmans BL. Pathogenesis of Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus. J Pathol. ;():-.

.

Nassar MS, Bakhrebah MA, Meo SA, Alsuabeyl MS, Zaher WA. Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection: epidemiology, pathogenesis
and clinical characteristics. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. ;():-.

.

Binnicker MJ. Emergence of a Novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-) and the
Importance of Diagnostic Testing: Why Partnership between Clinical Laboratories, Public
Health Agencies, and Industry Is Essential to Control the Outbreak. Clin Chem. .

.

Corman VM, Landt O, Kaiser M, et al. Detection of  novel coronavirus
(-nCoV) by real-time RT-PCR. Euro Surveill. ;().

.

Zou L, Ruan F, Huang M, et al. SARS-CoV- Viral Load in Upper Respiratory
Specimens of Infected Patients. N Engl J Med. .

.

Yang Y, Yang M, Shen C, et al. Evaluating the accuracy of different respiratory
specimens in the laboratory diagnosis and monitoring the viral shedding of -nCoV
infections. :....

.

Holshue ML, DeBolt C, Lindquist S, et al. First Case of  Novel Coronavirus in the
United States. N Engl J Med. .

.

Arabi YM, Mandourah Y, Al-Hameed F, et al. Corticosteroid Therapy for Critically Ill
Patients with Middle East Respiratory Syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
;():-.

.

Lansbury L, Rodrigo C, Leonardi-Bee J, Nguyen-Van-Tam J, Lim WS. Corticosteroids as
adjunctive therapy in the treatment of influenza. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
;:CD.

.

Stockman LJ, Bellamy R, Garner P. SARS: systematic review of treatment effects. PLoS
Med. ;():e.

.

Khamitov RA, Loginova S, Shchukina VN, Borisevich SV, Maksimov VA, Shuster AM.
[Antiviral activity of arbidol and its derivatives against the pathogen of severe acute
respiratory syndrome in the cell cultures]. Vopr Virusol. ;():-.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

.

Luo H, Tang QL, Shang YX, et al. Can Chinese Medicine Be Used for Prevention of
Corona Virus Disease  (COVID-)? A Review of Historical Classics, Research
Evidence and Current Prevention Programs. Chin J Integr Med. .

.

Wang W, Tang J, Wei F. Updated understanding of the outbreak of  novel

Accepted Article

coronavirus (-nCoV) in Wuhan, China. J Med Virol. ;():-.

Table  Zoonotic coronaviruses that causes serious disease in human.

Coronavirus

Affected

Intermediate

Potential

Host

Host

Reservoir

Disease

Cell

References

receptor

Host

SARS-CoV

Humans

Himalayan

Bat

SARS

ACE



Bat

MERS

DPP



NR

COVID-

ACE



palm civet /
racoon

MERS-CoV

Humans

Dromedary
camels

SARS-CoV-

Humans

NR

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Table  Clinical Symptoms associated with COVID-.

Accepted Article

Clinical
types

Symptoms

Mild type

nonpneumonia or mild pneumonia

Severe type

dyspnea, respiratory frequency ≥ /min, blood oxygen
saturation ≤ %, partial pressure of arterial oxygen to fraction
of inspired oxygen ratio < , and/or lung infiltrates >%
within  to  hours

Critical type

respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ
dysfunction or failure

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

