Spotlight

With rates of hospitalisation and mortality from novel
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) increasing, there
is understandable concern across the UK for medical
professionals and the general public. We hope to
highlight the challenges faced by children and healthcare professionals involved in their care, and propose key
strategies to address these challenges.
Severe COVID-19 in children is rare. To date, the largest
review of children with COVID-19 included 2143 children in
China. Only 112 (5·6%) of 2143 children had severe disease
(defined as hypoxia) and 13 (0·6%) children developed
respiratory or multiorgan failure or acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS). At the time of writing, there have
been two reported deaths in children testing positive for
COVID-19 in China, and no deaths in Italy. We are waiting
for formal reports of outcomes in children from other
countries but to date, no deaths have been reported in
the published literature. These figures are in stark contrast
to the 4% global mortality rate in adults with COVID-19.
Although the death rate from COVID-19 in children is low,
medical professionals and parents are concerned about the
health of children in the UK.
One concern is that even though most infected children
in the UK will have mild symptoms, some might become
severely unwell. Although it is unlikely that the proportion
of children with severe infection will be substantially worse
than in children in China or Italy, there might be some
differences in clinical characteristics, disease progression,
and outcome. Outcomes for childhood respiratory illnesses
are consistently worse in the UK than other countries, and
levels of obesity and antenatal smoking (both associated
with severe viral infection) are comparatively high. Adults
with cardiorespiratory comorbidities are at increased risk
of mortality from COVID-19; therefore, children with preexisting conditions are of specific concern to health-care
professionals. While it is necessary to highlight this risk,
many parents of and children with pre-existing conditions
are worried, not least because they hear terms like vulnerable
and high-risk.
For children with an underlying chest condition (eg,
cystic fibrosis or severe asthma), parental concern is
heightened. Children with chronic chest conditions, and
their families, have invested years of hard work to maintain
good respiratory health; to hear constantly that people with
underlying conditions are at increased risk can therefore
be alarming. No comprehensive data are available on the
impact of COVID-19 on children who are well, with an
underlying condition, but it is reasonable to consider they
might be at increased risk of severe disease. Statements by
organisations, such as charities, Royal Colleges, and parent
groups, have tried to achieve a difficult balance between
providing reassurance but also clear direction. Essentially,

families with children with chronic respiratory illness have
been encouraged to be more proactive with measures that
reduce the chances of acquiring COVID-19, but decisions
to undertake social distancing are complex and difficult
with profound implications for the family (employment)
and the young person if they are removed from education
unnecessarily.
Parents and health-care professionals are rightly con­
cerned because COVID-19 is a novel disease, with a weak
evidence-base on which to formulate clinical decisions.
Most literature relates to adult disease, but these findings
are not always transferrable to children. For example, in
adults, certain find­ings are associated with severe illness,
such as high serum ferritin and bilateral abnormalities
on chest CT. It is hard to determine common clinical
characteristics in children with severe disease, and it is
unclear whether there is a common biomarker, due to
the small number of cases. Treatment recommendations
to date are based on observations, rather than evidence
from clinical trials. Sharing or publishing papers online
before peer-review it is unclear whether there is a common
biomarker, and universal use of social media, enables
sharing of data quicker than ever before, which carries a
risk of propagating invalid conclusions on a large scale.
Some developments, however, have been heartening.
International collaboration and robust forward planning
has led to rapid development of randomised controlled
trials with harmonised protocols, and the first report of a
high-quality trial has already been published. Furthermore,
the world’s leading medical publishing groups have made
COVID-19-related manuscripts free to access, enabling
people globally to access information that would usually not
be available to everyone. Constant updates on the status of
the pandemic, available through Public Health England and
WHO, enable people to keep abreast of developments and
offer other excellent educational resources. Additionally, the
Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, in association
with partner organisations, are linking guidelines and
resources with NHS England to provide clear, unambiguous
advice and support based on the best available evidence.
Mainstream and social media are important for sharing
information and uniting people during difficult times of
social distancing and isolation. There are huge advantages
to being able to spread information throughout a
population at an unprecedented rate, including public
health messages, morale-boosting stories, and tips and
ideas generated by members of the public. With this
rapid spread of information, however, comes the risk of
misinformation. The pressure to keep up with breaking
news has led to a reduction in checking of integrity of
facts before reports are published, and due to the nature
of social media, political and personal viewpoints can drive

www.thelancet.com/respiratory Published online March 27, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30152-1	

John Birdsall Social Issues Photo Library/Science Photo Library

COVID-19 infection in children

Lancet Respir Med 2020
Published Online
March 27, 2020
https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2213-2600(20)30152-1
For the review see Pediatrics
2020; published online March 1.
DOI:10.1542/peds.2020-0702
For reports on child deaths due
to COVID-19 see review (above)
and N Engl J Med 2020; published
online March 18. DOI:10.1056/
NEJMc2005073
For child deaths in Italy see
JAMA 2020; published online
March 17. DOI:10.1001/
jama.2020.4344
For the latest WHO report on
COVID-19 see https://www.who.
int/docs/default-source/
coronaviruse/situationreports/20200316-sitrep-56covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=9fda7db2_2
For child health comparisons
see BMJ 2019;
3 (suppl 1): A1–A34
For clinical characteristics of
adults with COVID-19 see
Articles Lancet 2020;
395: 507–13
For characteristics of adults
with severe infection see
Comment Lancet 2020;
published online March 17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S01406736(20)30633-4
For the first randomised trial
see N Engl J Med 2020; published
online March 18. DOI:10.1056/
NEJMoa2001282

1

Spotlight

For the PHE programme see
https://www.england.nhs.uk/
coronavirus/publication/lettercovid-19-hospitalisation-inengland-surveillance-systemchess-daily-reporting/
For the Clinical Characterisation
Protocol see https://isaric.tghn.
org/UK-CCP/
For the National Child
Mortality Database see
https://www.ncmd.info/
For the NHS England webtool
see https//www.covidinchildren.
co.uk
For the RCPCH national
guidelines see https://www.
rcpch.ac.uk/resources/covid-19guidance-paediatric-services

2	

a narrative that undermines public health efforts or cause
confusion.
So how do we move forward over the coming months,
with all the uncertainty, change, and difficulties for children
and families? How do we ensure that we do not overtreat
children with self-limiting illness or miss the handful of
children with severe or life-threatening disease? The answer
is we need to get the basics right—thankfully, mechanisms
are in place to enable this.
As a community we need to learn, rapidly, how to manage
COVID-19; we need to use data, from the right sources, in
the right way, at the right time. There are four ongoing data
collection processes: the Public Health England programme
uses detailed information for crucial surveillance purposes.
In the Clinical Characterisation Protocol, funded by the
National Institute of Health Research, data from all adults
and children admitted to hospital with proven COVID-19
are collected, to enable rapid and robust understanding
of the disease. The National Child Mortality Database are
working to analyse possible emerging patterns of child
deaths that might be linked to COVID-19. Finally, NHS
England have funded and developed a secure webtool for
collecting minimal granular data from children admitted
with suspected and proven COVID-19, to feed this into a
real-time dashboard for paediatricians on the front-line,
and to enable clinically relevant understanding of disease
progression. All these endeavours are important if we are
to learn how to manage COVID-19.
We must try and manage children in an evidence-based
way, despite having very little evidence at our disposal. A
national guideline for the management of children with
COVID-19 is hosted and maintained by the Royal College
of Paediatrics and Child Health. These guidelines will be
updated as we learn more about the epidemiology and
treatment of COVID-19 in children. The challenge will be to
strike the right balance between doing this in a pragmatic,

timely way and yet maintaining scientific rigour to ensure
the most evidence-based approach to care.
We need to communicate well with children and families
in hospital. Personal Protective Equipment will look strange
to us, but it will be absolutely terrifying for children, many
of whom will have heard about COVID-19 in the news or
might even know of an adult with the disease. We need to
be compassionate and precise with our language and move
from classifying children as high-risk to children with preexisting conditions, in guidelines, the media, or in scientific
publications. Parents may believe that there is no treatment
for COVID-19, but we must help them understand that
supportive therapy is likely to be all that is needed. We also
need to communicate well at a wider level. Policy makers
and leaders will need to be honest when communicating the
huge societal and health-care changes about to unfold. The
media, and scientific researchers, will need to be responsible
with their reporting. Transparency in these situations
prevents misinformation and misinterpretation, and their
associated dangers. At a time of such great uncertainty and
anxiety, the truth is one of the most effective tools we have.
MGS reports grants from DHSC National Institute of Health Research UK, Health
Protection Research Unit in Emerging and Zoonotic Infections, and Medical
Research Council UK, outside of the submitted work. All other authors declare no
competing interests.

*Ian P Sinha, Rachel Harwood, Malcolm G Semple,
Daniel B Hawcutt, Rebecca Thursfield, Omendra Narayan,
Simon E Kenny, Russell Viner, Simon Langton Hewer,
Kevin W Southern
iansinha@liv.ac.uk
Alder Hey Children’s Hospital, Liverpool L14 5AP, UK (IPS, RH, MGS, RT, SEK);
Division of Child Health (IPS, DBH KWS), and Health Protection Research Unit in
Emerging and Zoonotic Infections, Faculty of Health and Life Science (MGS),
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK; Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital,
Manchester, UK (ON); NHS England, London, UK (SEK); Royal College of
Paediatrics and Child Health, London, UK (RV); British Paediatric Respiratory
Society, London, UK (SLH)

www.thelancet.com/respiratory Published online March 27, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30152-1

