Received:  January 

|

Accepted:  January 

DOI: ./jmv.

RESEARCH ARTICLE

The ‐new coronavirus epidemic: Evidence
for virus evolution
Domenico Benvenuto
Silvia Angeletti

| Marta Giovanetti | Alessandra Ciccozzi | Silvia Spoto |

| Massimo Ciccozzi


Unit of Medical Statistics and Molecular
Epidemiology, University Campus Bio‐Medico
of Rome, Rome, Italy

Laboratório de Flavivírus, Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil


Abstract
There is a worldwide concern about the new coronavirus ‐nCoV as a global
public health threat. In this article, we provide a preliminary evolutionary and molecular epidemiological analysis of this new virus. A phylogenetic tree has been built

Internal Medicine Unit, University Campus
Bio‐Medico of Rome, Rome, Italy

using the  available whole genome sequences of ‐nCoV,  whole genome



Unit of Clinical Laboratory Science, University
Campus Bio‐Medico of Rome, Rome, Italy

sequences of ‐nCoV, and  highly similar whole genome sequences available

Correspondence
Silvia Angeletti, Unit of Clinical Laboratory
Science, University Campus Bio‐Medico of
Rome, Rome , Italy.
Email: s.angeletti@unicampus.it

East respiratory syndrome, and five from bat SARS‐like coronavirus). Fast un-

in gene bank (five from the severe acute respiratory syndrome, two from Middle
constrained Bayesian approximation analysis shows that the nucleocapsid and the
spike glycoprotein have some sites under positive pressure, whereas homology
modeling revealed some molecular and structural differences between the viruses.
The phylogenetic tree showed that ‐nCoV significantly clustered with bat SARS‐
like coronavirus sequence isolated in , whereas structural analysis revealed mutation in Spike Glycoprotein and nucleocapsid protein. From these results, the new
‐nCoV is distinct from SARS virus, probably trasmitted from bats after mutation
conferring ability to infect humans.
KEYWORDS

coronavirus, epidemiology, macromolecular design, SARS coronavirus

 | INTRODUCTION

from MERS‐CoV and SARS‐CoV, was described. To date, a total of
 pneumonia cases have been confirmed in China (the State

The family Coronaviridae comprises a group of large, single, plus‐

Council Information Office in Beijing, capital of China,  January

stranded RNA viruses isolated from several species, and it is pre-

)., Animal to human transmission is considered the origin of

viously known to cause the common cold and diarrheal illnesses in

epidemics, as many patients declared to have visited a local fish and

humans., In , a new coronavirus (severe acute respiratory

wild animal market in Wuhan in November. Quite recently, evidence

syndrome coronavirus [SARS‐CoV]) was associated with the SARS

has been gathered for the animal to the human and interhuman

outbreak., Recently, a new coronavirus (‐nCoV) has emerged

transmission of the virus.,

in the region of Wuhan (China) as a cause of severe respiratory

Although prompt diagnosis and patient isolation are the

infection in humans. Since December , different cases of pneu-

hallmarks for initial control of this new epidemic, molecular epi-

monia of unknown origin associated with permanence at the Wuhan

demiology, evolutionary models, and phylogenetic analysis can

market in China have been reported., A new coronavirus, named

help estimate genetic variability and the evolutionary rate, which

‐nCoV, belonging to the Orthocoronavirinae subfamily, distinct

in turn have important implications for disease progression as

Silvia Angeletti and Massimo Ciccozzi contributed equally to this study.

J Med Virol. ;:–.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jmv

©  Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

|





|

BENVENUTO

ET AL.

well as for drug and vaccine development. In this short report,

two different clusters: cluster IIa with Bat SARS‐like coronavirus and

we provide a phylogenetic tree of the ‐nCoV and identify

the ‐nCoV sequences, and cluster IIb with the bat SARS‐like

sites of positive or negative selection pressure in distinct regions

coronavirus and the SARS virus sequences. The ‐nCoV is sig-

of the virus.

nificantly and closely related only to the specific bat SARS‐like coronavirus isolated from Rhinolophus sinicus in  in China
(MG.) (Figure ).

 | M A T E R I A L A N D M E TH O D S

Regarding the FUBAR analysis performed on the N Region, significant (P < .) pervasive episodic selection was found in two sites

The complete genomes of  ‐nCoV sequences have been

(th and th nucleotide position using the reference sequence;

downloaded from GISAID (https://www.gisaid.org/) and GenBank

Wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus isolate labeled Wuhan‐Hu‐

(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/). A dataset has been built

MN.). On the th aminoacidic position in the Wuhan

using five highly similar sequences for SARS, two sequences for the

coronavirus sequence, there is a glutamine residue instead of an

Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), and five highly similar

asparagine residue, whereas on the th aminoacidic position in

sequences for bat SARS‐like coronavirus. The percentage of similarity

Wuhan coronavirus sequence, there is a threonine residue instead of

has been identified using a basic local alignment search tool (https://

an alanine residue. A significant (P < .) pervasive negative selection

blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi); eventually duplicated sequences

in six sites (%) has been evidenced and confirmed by FUBAR

have been excluded from the datasets. The dataset including

analysis. Concerning the sequences in clade II, on the th ami-

 sequences has been aligned using multiple sequence alignment

noacidic position in the Wuhan coronavirus sequence, there is glu-

online tool and manually edited using BioEdit program v...

tamine instead of an asparagine residue, whereas, on the th

Maximum likelihood (ML) methods were employed for the ana-

aminoacidic position in Wuhan coronavirus sequence, there is a

lyses because they allow for testing different phylogenetic hy-

threonine residue instead of an alanine. A significant (P < .) per-

potheses by calculating the probability of a given model of evolution

vasive negative selection in six sites (%) has been evidenced and

generating the observed data and by comparing the probabilities of

confirmed by FUBAR analysis.

nested models by the likelihood ratio test. The best‐fitting nucleotide

On the S region, a significant (P < .) pervasive episodic se-

substitution model was chosen by jModeltest software. ML tree

lection was found in two different sites (th and th nucleotide

was reconstructed using generalized time‐reversible plus gamma

position using the reference sequence; the Wuhan seafood market

distribution and invariant sites (+G+I) as an evolutionary model using

pneumonia virus isolate labeled Wuhan‐Hu‐ MN.). For



MEGA‐X.

the sequences in clade II, on the th aminoacidic position in the

The adaptive evolution server (http://www.datamonkey.org/)

Wuhan coronavirus sequence, there is an asparagine residue in-

was used to find eventual sites of positive or negative selection. For

stead of an aspartic acid residue, whereas, on the th aminoacidic

this purpose, the following test has been used: fast unconstrained

position in Wuhan coronavirus sequence, there is a threonine re-



This test allowed us to infer the

sidue instead of an alanine residue. A significant (P < .) pervasive

site‐specific pervasive selection, the episodic diversifying selection

negative selection in  sites (%) has been evidenced and

across the region of interest, and to identify episodic selection at

confirmed by FUBAR analysis, suggesting that the S region could be

individual sites. The statistically significant positive or negative

highly conserved.

Bayesian approximation (FUBAR).

selection was based on P value less than ..



Homology models have been built relying on the website

No sites under positive selection sites have been found in the
E and M regions.

SwissModel. Structural templates have been searched and vali-

The N region of the ‐nCoV homology model has been built

dated using the software available within the SwissModel environ-

using a SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein structure (jw.) as

ment and HHPred. Homology models have been validated using the

the statistical test has shown that this is the most stable and similar



QMEAN tool.

Three‐dimensional structures have been analyzed

model among the other possible structures (Ramachandran favored

and displayed using PyMOL. To map the structural variability of the

.%, GMQE ., QMEAN −.), whereas, for the S region, the

N, E, S, and M regions of the virus and their sites under selection

‐nCoV homology model has been built using a SARS coronavirus

pressure, homology modeling has been applied to the sequence of

spike glycoprotein (acc.) for the same reason (Ramachandran fa-

‐nCoV.

vored .%, GMQE ., QMEAN −.) (Figure ).
The further structural and molecular analysis of the Nucleocapsid region of the ‐nCoV (MN.) has highlighted that

 | RESULTS

‐nCoV and the bat SARS‐like coronavirus (MG.) share
the same aminoacidic sequence near the th position (SKQLQQ,)

The ML phylogenetic tree, performed on whole genome sequences, is

whereas the SARS reference genome has a different aminoacidic

represented in Figure . In the tree, MERS virus sequences formed a

sequence (SRQLQN). The same results have been found in the th

distinct clade (clade I) from Bat SARS‐like coronavirus, SARS virus,

aminoacidic position (KADET for ‐nCoV and bat SARS‐like

and the ‐nCoV clustering together in clade II. This clade includes

coronavirus and KTDEA for the SARS reference genome).

BENVENUTO

FIGURE 

|

ET AL.



Maximum likelihood tree of ‐nCoV. Along the branches, an asterisk (*) indicates a statistical value from bootstrap (>%)

In particular, in this case, the ‐nCoV has a polar amino acid,

the bat SARS‐like coronavirus has a glutamine residue. The SARS

whereas the SARS has a nonpolar amino acid (Figure ).

virus, instead, has an aspartic acid residue. On the th aminoacidic

Regarding the sites under positive selective pressure found on

position in ‐nCoV sequence, there is a threonine residue,

the spike glycoprotein, the results have shown that the th ami-

whereas the bat SARS‐like virus has a serine residue. The SARS virus,

noacidic position in ‐nCoV has an asparagine residue, whereas

however, has an alanine residue.

F I G U R E  Cartoon model of the structural
superposition between the homology model
of the ‐nCoV in blue and the
nucleocapsid protein of SARS coronavirus
(PDB code jw.) in orange. The red circle
highlights the presence of an alpha‐helix on
the SARS‐CoV and the absence of the
‐nCoV structure, and e positional
difference of the beta‐sheets. SARS,
severe acute respiratory syndrome



|

BENVENUTO

ET AL.

F I G U R E  Cartoon model of the structural superposition between the homology model of the ‐nCoV in blue and the spike glycoprotein
of SARS coronavirus (PDB code acc.) in orange. The red circle highlights the presence of a variable region on the ‐nCoV at the beginning
of the protein, whereas the blue square highlights the presence of two beta‐sheets on the ‐nCoV (:KYR and :LND) that are not
present on the SARS‐CoV structure; SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome

 | D I S C U S SI O N

pressure, led by the epidemic evolution, could favor an enhancement of pathogenicity and transmission of this novel virus.

The data reported above show that the new ‐nCoV significantly

Recently, Ji et al described homologous recombination within

clustered with a sequence from the bat SARS‐like coronavirus iso-

the spike glycoprotein of ‐nCoV favoring cross‐species

lated in . Moreover, in the phylogenetic tree, these two se-

transmission and suggested snake as probable virus reservoir for

quences are separated from the other bat SARS‐like coronavirus

human infection because its resampling similarity codon usage bias

sequences, suggesting that this bat SARS‐like coronavirus is homo-

is more similar to Bungarus multicinctus snake compared with other

logous and genetically more similar to the ‐nCoV than to the

animals and humans. In a previous article, it has been proven that

other sequences of Bat SARS‐like coronavirus. This supports the

compositional properties, mutation pressure, natural selection,

hypothesis that the transmission chain began from the bat and

gene expression, and dinucleotides, affect the codon usage bias of

reached the human. All other genomic sequences represented in the

Bungarus species.

phylogenetic tree, also including SARS and MERS coronavirus, clus-

These data, along with analysis from our study, enforcing

tered separately, thus excluding the fact that the virus involved in the

bat origin of infection, could clarify the transmission dynamics of

actual epidemic could belong to these subgenuses. The structural

the ‐nCoV, supporting infection control policy during the

analysis of two important viral proteins, the nucleocapsid and the

ongoing epidemic.

spike‐like nucleoprotein (protein S), confirmed the significant similarity of the new coronavirus with the bat‐like SARS coronavirus and

ORCI D

its difference from SARS coronavirus.

Domenico Benvenuto

From the selective pressure and structural analysis, mutations
of surface proteins, as the spike protein S, and of nucleocapsid N

Silvia Angeletti
Massimo Ciccozzi

http://orcid.org/---

http://orcid.org/---
http://orcid.org/---

protein conferring stability to the viral particle have been shown.
The viral spike protein is responsible for virus entry into the cell
after by binding to a cell receptor and membrane fusion, two key
steps in viral infection and pathogenesis. The N protein is a
structural protein involved in virion assembly, playing a pivotal
role in virus transcription and assembly efficiency. Mutation of
these proteins could determine two important characteristics of
the coronavirus isolated during the ‐nCoV epidemic: a higher
ability to infect and enhanced pathogenicity than the bat‐like SARS
coronavirus but lower pathogenicity than SARS coronavirus. These
features can explain the ‐nCoV zoonotic transmission and its
initial lower severity than SARS epidemic. These results do not
exclude the fact that further mutation due to positive selective

R E F E R E N CE S
. Drosten C, Günther S, Preiser W, et al. Identification of a novel coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome. N Engl J
Med. ;:‐.
. Chen Y, Liu Q, Guo D. Emerging coronaviruses: genome structure,
replication, and pathogenesis. J Med Virol. . https://doi.org/.
/jmv.
. Chan JF‐W, Yuan S, Kok K‐H, et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia
associated with the  novel coronavirus indicating person‐to‐
person transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet. . https://
doi.org/./S‐()‐
. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with
 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. . https://doi.
org/./S‐()‐

BENVENUTO

|

ET AL.

. Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, et al. A novel coronavirus from patients
with pneumonia in China, . N Engl J Med. . https://doi.org/
./NEJMoa
. Hui DS, Azhar EI, Madani TA, et al. The continuing ‐nCoV epidemic threat of novel coronaviruses to global health ‐ The latest 
novel coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, China. Int J Infect Dis. ;
():‐.
. Lu H, Stratton CW, Tang YW. Outbreak of pneumonia of unknown
etiology in Wuhan China: the mystery and the miracle. J Med Virol.
. https://doi.org/./jmv.
. Ji W, Wang W, Zhao X, Zai J, Li X. Homologous recombination within
the spike glycoprotein of the newly identified coronavirus may boost
cross‐species transmission from snake to human. J Med Virol. .
https://doi.org/./jmv.
. Katoh K, Rozewicki J, Yamada KD. MAFFT online service: multiple sequence alignment, interactive sequence choice and visualization. Brief
Bioinform. ;():‐. https://doi.org/./bib/bbx
. Hall TA. BioEditA user‐friendly biological sequence alignment editor
and analysis program for Windows //NT. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser.
;:‐.
. Darriba D, Taboada GL, Doallo R, Posada D. jModelTest : more models,
new heuristics and parallel computing. Nat Methods. ;():.
. Kumar S, Stecher G, Li M, Knyaz C, Tamura K. MEGA X: Molecular
Evolutionary Genetics Analysis across computing platforms. Mol Biol
Evol. ;():‐.
. Murrell B, Moola S, Mabona A, et al. FUBAR: a fast, unconstrained
bayesian approximation for inferring selection. Mol Biol Evol. ;
():‐.



. Murrell B, Wertheim JO, Moola S, Weighill T, Scheffler K, Kosakovsky
Pond SL. Detecting individual sites subject to episodic diversifying
selection. PLoS Genet. ;():e.
. Waterhouse A, Bertoni M, Bienert S. SWISS‐MODEL: homology
modelling of protein structures and complexes. Nucleic Acids Res.
;(W):W‐W.
. Zimmermann L, Stephens A, Nam SZ. A completely reimplemented
MPI Bioinformatics Toolkit with a new HHpred server at its core.
J Mol Biol. ;():‐.
. Benkert P, Künzli M, Schwede T. QMEAN server for protein model
quality estimation. Nucleic Acids Res. ;(W):W‐W. .
. Schrödinger LLC. The {PyMOL} Molecular Graphics System,
Version~., 
. Chakraborty S, Nag D, Mazumder TH, Uddin A. Codon usage
pattern and prediction of gene expression level in Bungarus
species. Gene. ;:‐. https://doi.org/./j.gene.
..

How to cite this article: Benvenuto D, Giovanetti M,
Ciccozzi A, Spoto S, Angeletti S, Ciccozzi M. The ‐new
coronavirus epidemic: Evidence for virus evolution.
J Med Virol. ;:–.
https://doi.org/./jmv.

