Correspondence

	

	

	

UK Government. Press release - update from
SAGE: delay phase modelling. March , .
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/
update-from-sage-delay-phase-modelling
(accessed March , ).
Remuzzi A, Remuzzi G. COVID- and Italy:
what next? Lancet ; published online
March . https://doi.org/./
S-()-.
Anderson RM, Heesterbeek H, Klinkenberg D,
Hollingsworth TD. How will country-based
mitigation efforts influence the course of the
COVID- epidemic? Lancet ; published
online March . https://doi.org/./
S-()-.
WHO. Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission
on Coronavirus Disease  (COVID-).
Feb , . https://www.who.int/docs/
default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-jointmission-on-covid--final-report.pdf
(accessed March , ).

COVID- cacophony:
is there any orchestra
conductor?
The first wave of coronavirus disease
 (COVID-) pandemic is
currently invading the world, and
several countries are now struggling
to fight it or trying to delay its start
to help smooth its peak size for
the purpose of lowering morbidity
and mortality, and thereby reduce
the overall tension on their healthcare system. China’s first major
outbreaks of COVID- happened
in January, . Then South Korea,
Iran, and Italy entered into this Ravel’s
Bolero-like epidemic in late February
and early March, , and many
other countries are preparing to play
the same rhythmic pattern in the
coming days and weeks.
All countries have to react and
take action without any conducting
from WHO. WHO’s Director-General
declared on Jan, , , a Public
Health Emergency of International
Concern, which allowed him to release
subsequent recommendations, but
none were issued with regard to what
to do, and when to do it, at the country
level. With no vaccine or antivirals, the
portfolio of countermeasures against
COVID- is limited. Only a small set
of evidence-based non-pharmaceutical
interventions are available.–
www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 	

Measures like self-quarantine, or
temperature control at borders, are
not expected to be very effective
since half of infections are asymp­
tomatic. There is consensus today
to propose school closure, restrict
social gathering (including shutdown
of workplaces), limit population
movements, and introduce so-called
cordons sanitaires, which means
quarantines at the scale of cities or
regions. There is less consensus about
which measure should start first, in
which combination, and when.
There is no direct scientific evidence
regarding wearing protective masks in
public spaces for asymptomatic people,
but mask protection is heavily practised
in Asian populations and seems deeply
despised in Western cultures. There
is no common policy about which
measures should be considered, and
at which epidemiological threshold
such measures should be implemented.
Nobody knows at which level restric­
tions on mass gathering should be
imposed.
The recent Chinese experience
of combining non-pharmaceutical
interventions to curb outbreak trends
seems rather convincing. Although
starting late in the process, authori­
tarian Chinese authorities succeeded
in combining forced isolation of the
population with all available social
distancing interventions. The democratic
Italian Government, followed by the
governments of France, Spain, and
other countries, set up most of these
measures quickly in the epidemic
process but lacked any international
guidance or recommendations. Would
they not have expected to see WHO
headquarters as the orchestra con­
ductor at this stage of the process? Do
Member States not need some level of
harmonisation and coordination when
implementing the four available nonpharmaceutical interventions to help
them decide whether, when, and how to
implement them; if, when, and how to
combine them; and to what extent? In
addition, the Chinese Government has
no guidance nor recommendation about

lifting measures that have been in place
in Wuhan since Jan , . To what
extent, at which pace, and how should
they start lifting their intervention and
allow people to resume normal social
and economic life?
WHO remains surprisingly silent
and absent in all of these pragmatic
questions.
I declare no competing interests.

Antoine Flahault
antoine.flahault@unige.ch
Institute of Global Health, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva,  Geneva, Switzerland
	

	

	

	

	

	

WHO. Statement on the second meeting of
the International Health Regulations ()
Emergency Committee regarding the outbreak
of novel coronavirus (-nCoV).
Jan , . https://www.who.int/newsroom/detail/---statement-on-thesecond-meeting-of-the-international-healthregulations-()-emergency-committeeregarding-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus(-ncov) (accessed March , ).
WHO Writing Group, Bell D, Nicoll A, et al.
Nonpharmaceutical interventions for
pandemic influenza, international measures.
Emerg Infect Dis ; : –.
WHO Writing Group, Bell D, Nicoll A, et al.
Nonpharmaceutical interventions for
pandemic influenza, national and community
measures. Emerg Infect Dis ; : –.
Haber MJ, Shay DK, Davis XM, et al.
Effectiveness of interventions to reduce
contact rates during simulated influenza
pandemic. Emerg Infect Dis ; : –.
Markel H, Lipman HB, Navarro JA, et al.
Nonpharmaceutical interventions implemented
by US cities during the – influenza
pandemic. JAMA ; : –.
European Centre for Disease Prevention and
Control. Considerations relating to social
distancing measures in response to the
COVID- epidemic. March , .
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/
files/documents/social-distancing-measuresin-response-to-the-COVID--epidemic.pdf
(accessed March , ).

Published Online
March , 
https://doi.org/./
S-()-

Future of Chernobyl
research: the urgency for
consolidated action
The Chernobyl nuclear disaster on
April , , continues to create
fears and myths about its health
consequences, as shown by the
large response to a top-rated HBO
miniseries devoted to the tragic
event. Risk assessments range from
recognising an increase in thyroid

Sputnik/Science Photo Library

	

See Editorial page 



