Correspondence

A role for CT in
COVID-? What data
really tell us so far
Radiologists have watched the
coronavirus disease  (COVID-)
pandemic unfold, wondering if and
how imaging could be useful for
diagnosis. Perhaps imaging could aid
in screening or accelerate the speed of
diagnosis, especially with shortages of
RT-PCR.
Some radiology literature suggests
a pivotal role for CT. Ai and colleagues
report on  patients who received
both RT-PCR and CT in Wuhan, China,
during their epidemic. They found
that % of cases with RT-PCR-con­
firmed diagnoses had CT findings of
pneumonia, and conclude, “CT imaging
has high sensitivity for diagnosis of
COVID-”. Other investigators are
less optimistic. Inui and colleagues
reviewed CT scans of  cases of
RT-PCR-confirmed COVID- from the
Diamond Princess cruise ship. Less than
two-thirds (%) of cases had lung
opacities on CT; % of symptomatic
patients had negative CTs.
Although extremely valuable, these
results should not be overstated.
The CT findings studied (eg, groundglass opacity, consolidation) are not
specific for COVID-. Similar results
would probably be found if CT were
used during an influenza epidemic,
for example. The positive predictive
value of CT will be low unless disease
prevalence is high, as we suspect it
was in Wuhan. Their cohort includes
“patients suspected of [COVID-],”
presumably sick and possibly hos­
pitalised, although details are not
provided.
RT-PCR to diagnose COVID-
has some limitations: the test is not
universally available, turnaround
times can be lengthy, and reported
sensitivities vary. Nevertheless, it is the
accepted standard and only positive
in patients who are infected with
severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus . CT findings in patients

with COVID-, on the other hand, are
seen with numerous pathogens and
in many non-infectious aetiologies.
We believe CT does not add diagnostic
value; positive results can only be
believed if the pre-test probability of
disease is high. Using CT diagnostically
is not known to provide clinical benefit
and could lead to false security if
results are negative. If COVID- is
suspected, patients should be isolated
pending confirmation with (multiple)
RT-PCR tests, or until quarantine has
lapsed. The results of a CT scan do not
change this.
We feel that framing CT as pivotal
for COVID- diagnosis is a distraction
during a pandemic, and possibly
dangerous. Safely using CT to study
COVID- patients is logistically
challenging and can overwhelm
available resources. Even with
proper cleaning protocols, healthcare professionals and CT scanners
could become vectors of infection
to other vulnerable patients who
require imaging. We urge caution and
encourage using published guidelines
regarding use of CT imaging.

	

American College of Radiology.
ACR recommendations for the use of chest
radiography and computed tomography (CT)
for suspected COVID- infection.
March , . https://www.acr.org/
Advocacy-and-Economics/ACR-PositionStatements/Recommendations-for-ChestRadiography-and-CT-for-Suspected-COVIDInfection (accessed March , ).

Published Online
March , 
https://doi.org/./
S-()-

We declare no competing interests.

*Michael D Hope,
Constantine A Raptis, Amar Shah,
Mark M Hammer, Travis S Henry, on
behalf of six signatories†
michael.hope@ucsf.edu
†Signatories are listed in the appendix.

See Online for appendix

Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA , USA (MDH, TSH); Department of
Radiology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, CA, USA (MDH); Mallinckrodt
Institute of Radiology, Washington University
School of Medicine in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO,
USA (CAR); Department of Radiology, Zucker School
of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Manhasset, NY,
USA (AS); and Department of Radiology, Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA (MMH)
	

	

Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, et al. Correlation of chest
CT and RT-PCR testing in coronavirus disease
 (COVID-) in China: a report of
 cases. Radiology ; published online
Feb . DOI:./radiol..
Inui S, Fukikawa A, Jitsu M, et al. Chest CT
findings in cases from the cruise ship
“Diamond Princess” with coronavirus disease
 (COVID-). Radiology: Cardiothoracic
Imaging ; published online March .
DOI:./ryct..

www.thelancet.com Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	

Submissions should be
made via our electronic
submission system at
http://ees.elsevier.com/
thelancet/



