Correspondence

CT screening for early
diagnosis of SARS-CoV-
infection
Authors’ reply

We appreciate the concerns raised
by Yongshun Huang and colleagues
regarding our Article on radiological
findings in coronavirus disease 
(COVID-). During the outbreak of
COVID- in China in January, and
February, , timely diagnosis was
a crucial step for infection control,
especially in the epidemic area of
Wuhan, Hubei province. However,
RT-PCR kits were not sufficiently
provided to hospitals in Wuhan until
Jan , . Before then, there
was less capacity of kits to meet the
rapidly increasing clinical demand.
Furthermore, the total positive rate
of RT-PCR for throat swab samples
was reported to be less than %.
The diagnostic sensitivity of viral
pneumonia by chest radiography was
relatively low, whereas CT had a high
sensitivity for diagnosis of COVID-,
making it a potential primary tool
for COVID- detection in epidemic
areas. Additionally, according to the
guideline for diagnosis and treatment
of COVID- by the Chinese Ministry
of Health (fifth trial edition), clinically
suspected cases in Hubei province
were mainly those with imaging

features consistent with pneumonia.
We agree that there should be clear
criteria for CT use in diagnosis of
COVID-. In fact, we do not recom­
mend CT for screening or early diagnosis
in all areas or for all populations. In our
study, group  (preclinical) included
health-care workers (ten nurses and
five physicians) from two hospitals
in Wuhan, who were on the frontline
during the outbreak peak. All
 participants had close contact
with confirmed cases and willingly
underwent CT scanning as a screening
measure. Our Article retrospectively
included this group, mainly to illustrate
the imaging findings in the subclinical
phase, which might also be incidentally
found in patients who are imaged for
other reasons. Based on this discovery in
an epidemic area, we have proposed the
potential role of CT in asymptomatic
high-risk individuals with a history
of exposure to COVID- patients in
epidemic areas. Compared with another
recent publication, the discrepancy in
CT positive rates might be attributed
to variable sample sizes, different
demographic features, and potential
retrospective selection bias.
In the epidemic area, all CT scans
were done in accordance with strict
infection control protocol to avoid
cross-infection. We agree that use of
CT for screening or diagnosis has a
disproportionate risk–benefit ratio.

Fortunately, under well controlled
epidemic conditions in Wuhan,
the RT-PCR assay or severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
antibody test are the first choices for
screening for COVID- at present.

Lancet Infect Dis 
Published Online
March , 
https://doi.org/./
S-()-

We declare no competing interests.

Heshui Shi, Xiaoyu Han, Yukun Cao,
Osamah Alwalid, *Chuansheng Zheng
hqzcsxh@sina.com
Department of Radiology, Union Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei , China
(HS, XH, YC, OA, CZ); and Hubei Province Key
Laboratory of Molecular Imaging, Wuhan, Hubei,
China (HS, XH, YC, OA, CZ)
	

	

	
	

	

Shi H, Han X, Jiang N, et al. Radiological
findings from  patients with COVID-
pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive
study. Lancet Infect Dis ; published online
Feb . https://doi.org/./ S()-.
Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, et al. Correlation of chest
CT and RT-PCR testing in coronavirus disease
 (COVID-) in China: a report of
 cases. Radiology ; published online
Feb . DOI:./radiol..
Franquet T. Imaging of pulmonary viral
pneumonia. Radiology ; : –.
General Office of National Health Committee.
Notice on the issuance of a program for the
diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus
(-nCoV) infected pneumonia
(fifth trial edition). Feb , . http://www.
nhc.gov.cn/yzygj/sm//
ebdabdedbea.
shtml (accessed March , ).
Zhibin H, Song C. Screening and management
of asymptomatic infection of corona virus
disease  (COVID-). Chin J Prev Med
; published online March . DOI:./
cma.j.cn--.

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	



