The

NEW ENGLA ND JOURNAL

of

MEDICINE

Perspective
﻿

Am I Part of the Cure or Am I Part of the Disease?
Keeping Coronavirus Out When a Doctor Comes Home
Christian Rose, M.D.​​
Keeping Coronavirus Out When a Doctor Comes Home

L

ast year, after a month of dry cough and
shortness of breath while walking up the
steep steps of Fillmore Street in San Francisco,
Mary, my mother-in-law and housemate, noticed

that she was becoming more and
more easily winded. When her
symptoms didn’t improve over the
next several weeks, her doctors at
the University of California, San
Francisco, ordered a CT scan. They
found bronchiolitis obliterans, a
chronic, progressive lung condition that leads to gradually worsening lung disease and respiratory collapse. There is no treatment
for this disease, whose natural history ends in lung transplantation
for patients who are young and
healthy enough to undergo it.
Mary has spent every day of the
past year and a half focused on
respiratory physiotherapy, prac­
ticing breathing techniques that
ease her symptoms but do little
to slow disease progression.

“What can Mama do to stay
safe?” my wife asks, in light of
the coronavirus cases now cropping up in San Francisco. There
are many things we don’t yet know
about Covid-. We do know, however, that like many viral illnesses,
it is most deadly to people who are
elderly, already ill, or immunocompromised. And it is especially dangerous to those with lung conditions, given the predominance of
pulmonary complications. I recommend the guidelines from the
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, telling my wife, “She
can stay home, cover her coughs,
and practice good hand hygiene.”
Mary and I discuss the situation in the kitchen of the multigenerational home we’ve shared

since I moved to San Francisco as
a new doctor a few years ago. In
a city with housing costs that skyrocketed with the tech boom,
young professionals like me have
had to rethink our definitions of
personal space. In our home, we
have balanced everyone’s needs
well, managing odd hours, grocery shopping, and cooking out of
sync with each other’s schedules.
My friends ask Mary, a history professor at San Jose State University,
for reading recommendations to
help them compare the current
rise of nationalism with that of
the early th century, and in turn
she asks us for Ruth Bader Ginsburg memes to show her class. We
watch Netflix together, on mailorder DVDs, after long days.
We take long walks in the
neighborhood, through the San
Francisco streets Mary has called
home since childhood, and her
childhood friends join us along
the way. She treats each step as

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org ﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March , . For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.



Keeping Coronavirus Out When a Doctor Comes Home

PERS PE C T IV E

part of her physiotherapy. It seems
to make this convalescent period
that much more bearable for her,
to be able to reexperience her transitions from girlhood to womanhood, from motherhood to grandmotherhood, while maintaining
some form of normalcy. Though
the stairs up to the poetry section
at City Lights have gotten harder
to climb, at least Ginsberg and
Kerouac are still there when she
arrives.
But now that coronavirus has
crept into San Francisco like Karl
the Fog, visiting a bookstore can
feel like a risk. Is it worth it? Mary
wonders before stepping out the
door. What if someone at Cal-Mart has
it? Has my student who was coughing
in the back row been traveling? “I’ll
need to cancel my trip to Berlin,”
she says, imagining the recirculated airplane air and the crowds
moving through travel hubs and
responding to evolving travel restrictions. Travel — especially to
that once-war-torn city with its
famous wall meant as a form of
barrier protection from the infectious spread of capitalism — is
one of Mary’s passions.
She is undeterred, however,
since she has some control over
these risks, and she vows to keep
living her life and being involved
in her community, if even remotely, until she’s told she can’t.
The only restriction she is sure
that she’ll avoid, at all costs, is
visiting the hospital, where viruses jump around waiting rooms
and hide in white coats and Half
Windsors. “We’ve always said the
real point of entry for coronavirus
is a busy emergency room,” noted
Mike Ryan of the World Health
Organization’s Health Emergencies Program. All Mary has to do



is avoid the places where sick
people go.
There’s only one problem: every
day when I return home from
work, I’m coming back from a
busy emergency department (ED).
The irony is that despite health
workers’ being “the glue that holds
the health system and outbreak
response together,” per Tedros
Ghebreyesus, director-general of
the WHO, % of the Covid-
cases in Wuhan resulted from hospital-related transmission. Health
care providers are at increased
risk for developing the condition
and spreading it. Work stress is
believed to weaken their immune
systems, and close, intimate care
of patients can lead to exposure
to a higher viral load. Despite
performing selfless work on behalf of their communities, health
care workers have faced social
stigma during this outbreak.
As a colleague and I go through
the  steps for donning personal
protective equipment and the subsequent  steps for safely doffing
it in the back corner of the ED,
Coldplay’s “Clocks” comes through
on my overnight playlist: Am I a
part of the cure, or am I part of the disease? We wonder whether our commitment to our community puts
our families at risk at home. But
who would manage the triage
tents, resuscitate the respiratory
failures, and manage the intensive care units if health care professionals steered clear? Who
would study the disease spread,
investigate novel therapies, develop the disaster plans, or manage
all the other health issues that
continue to occur without regard
for the virus? If some physicians
or nurses or physician assistants
stop coming to work, the health

care system will face further
stress, and patient outcomes will
suffer.
Nevertheless, I see the horror
in my wife’s face whenever I
scratch my nose with the end of
my glasses or sneeze into my elbow. It’s as though she’s hearing
the police tell her that “The call
is coming from inside the house!”
The virus’s threat is as ominous
as a gun’s — both far more dangerous to you when they live in
your home than when wielded by
an invader. Yet the wounds these
pathogens inflict and the diseases
they spread are what my colleagues
and I have devoted our lives to
treating. Are we being irresponsible to our families and friends
by going out to dinner, by hugging
or kissing them good night?
Mary and I talked about what
it would mean if she were to become infected. Breathing might be
as difficult as marching up Mount
Everest without an oxygen tank.
She might cough so much that
her chest would feel like she had
just ducked out of the ring with
Muhammad Ali. She might need
to be hospitalized. Her lung reserve is so low that she would
most likely wind up on a mechanical respirator in an intensive care
unit, probably on the th floor
at UCSF, where I trained several
years ago. Perhaps the team would
attempt extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO), hoping that
more time would be the answer.
It is not unlikely that she would
die, that this invisible invader, this
microscopic enemy would be the
end of her story. All this just because I came home.
I stand in the ambulance bay
outside the hospital at  a.m. and
begin to call friends from resi-

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org ﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March , . For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

PE R S PE C T IV E

dency. I’m looking for a room
where I can stay: last night, I was
exposed to a patient with possible
Covid- who needed intubation.
The music still plays in my head:
Home, home, where I wanted to go.
“I have space at my apartment,
and if you’re exposed, I guess I
am, too,” Sam, my fellow overnight doc, says as she walks
through the sliding doors behind
me. Times like this can leave physicians stranded between our commitment to the community and

Keeping Coronavirus Out When a Doctor Comes Home

responsibility to our families —
a no man’s land where a colleague’s spare bed may be the
closest approximation of home that
we can find.
Disclosure forms provided by the author
are available at NEJM.org.
From the Center for Health Policy, Freeman
Spogli Institute for International Studies,
and the Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research, School of Medicine —
both at Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
This article was published on March ,
, at NEJM.org.

.	 Coronavirus disease  (COVID-):
prevention & treatment. Atlanta:​Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention,  (https://
www​.cdc​.gov/​coronavirus/​​-­ncov/​about/​
prevention​-­t reatment​.html).
.	 Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of
and important lessons from the coronavirus
disease  (COVID-) outbreak in China:
summary of a report of   cases from
the Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention. JAMA  February  (Epub
ahead of print).
.	 Chang D, Xu H, Rebaza A, Sharma L,
Dela Cruz CS. Protecting health-care workers from subclinical coronavirus infection.
Lancet Respir Med ;​():​e.
DOI: ./NEJMp
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society.
Keeping Coronavirus Out When a Doctor Comes Home

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org ﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March , . For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.



