Correspondence

The COVID- response
must be disability
inclusive
There are more than  billion people
living with disabilities (PLWD) world­
wide. The coronavirus disease 
(COVID-) pandemic is likely to
disproportionately affect these
individuals, putting them at risk of
increased morbidity and mortality,
underscoring the urgent need to
improve provision of health care for
this group and maintain the global
health commitment to achieving
Universal Health Coverage (UHC).
PLWD, including physical, mental,
intellectual, or sensory disabilities, are
less likely to access health services,
and more likely to experience greater
health needs, worse outcomes, and
discriminatory laws and stigma. 
COVID- threatens to exacerbate
these disparities, particularly in lowincome and middle-income countries,
where % of PLWD reside, and
capacity to respond to COVID- is
limited., Preparedness and response
planning must be inclusive of and
accessible to PLWD, recognising and
addressing three key barriers.
First, PLWD might have inequities
in access to public health messaging.
All communication should be
disseminated in plain language and
across accessible formats, through
mass and digital media channels.
Additionally, strategies for vital inperson communication must be
safe and accessible, such as sign
language interpreters and wearing
of transparent masks by health-care
providers to allow lip reading.
Second, measures such as physical
distancing or self-isolation might
disrupt service provision for PLWD,
who often rely on assistance for
delivery of food, medication, and
personal care. Mitigation strategies
should not lead to the segregation
or institutionalisation of these
individuals. Instead, protective
measures should be prioritised for

these communities, so care workers
and family members can continue to
safely support PLWD, who should also
be enabled to meet their daily living,
health care, and transport needs,
and maintain their employment and
educational commitments.
Third, PLWD might be at increased
risk of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus  infection
or severe disease because of existing
comorbidities, and might face
additional barriers to health care
during the pandemic. Health-care
staff should be provided with rapid
awareness training on the rights
and diverse needs of this group to
maintain their dignity, safeguard
against discrimination, and prevent
inequities in care provision.
COVID- mitigation strategies
must be inclusive of PLWD to ensure
they maintain respect for “dignity,
human rights and fundamental
freedoms,”  and avoid widening
existing disparities. This necessitates
accelerating efforts to include these
groups in preparedness and response
planning, and requires diligence,
creativity, and innovative thinking, to
preserve our commitment to UHC, and
ensure people living with disabilities
are not forgotten.

	

Human Rights Watch. Human rights
dimensions of COVID- response.
Human Rights Watch, March , .
https://www.hrw.org/news////
human-rights-dimensions-covid-response#_Toc (accessed
March , ).

Lancet Public Health 
Published Online
March , 
https://doi.org/./
S-()-

We declare no competing interests.
Copyright ©  The Author(s). Published by
Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the
CC BY. license.

*Richard Armitage, Laura B Nellums
msxra@nottingham.ac.uk
Division of Epidemiology and Public Health,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG PB,
UK (RA, LBN)
	

	

	
	

Kuper H, Heydt P. The mission billion: access to
health services for  billion people with
disabilities. London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, . https://www.lshtm.
ac.uk/TheMissingBillion (accessed
March , ).
UN News. Preventing discrimination against
people with disabilities in COVID- response.
UN News, March , . https://news.un.
org/en/story/// (accessed
March , ).
The Lancet. Prioritising disability in universal
health coverage. Lancet ; : .
Global Health Security Index. .
https://www.ghsindex.org (accessed
March , ).

www.thelancet.com/public-health Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	



