medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

Network-based Drug Repurposing for Human Coronavirus
Yadi Zhou,#, Yuan Hou,#, Jiayu Shen, Yin Huang, William Martin, Feixiong Cheng-,*



Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH

, USA


Department of Molecular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Case

Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH , USA


Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University School of

Medicine, Cleveland, Oh , USA
#

Equal contribution

*Correspondence to:
Feixiong Cheng, PhD
Lerner Research Institute
Cleveland Clinic
Tel: +---; Fax: +---
Email: chengf@ccf.org



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

Abstract
Human Coronaviruses (HCoVs), including severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (SARS-CoV), Middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV),
and  novel coronavirus (-nCoV), lead global epidemics with high morbidity and
mortality. However, there are currently no effective drugs targeting -nCoV. Drug
repurposing, represented as an effective drug discovery strategy from existing drugs,
could shorten the time and reduce the cost compared to de novo drug discovery. In this
study, we present an integrative, antiviral drug repurposing methodology implementing
a systems pharmacology-based network medicine platform, quantifying the interplay
between the HCoV-host interactome and drug targets in the human protein-protein
interaction network. Phylogenetic analyses of  HCoV whole genomes reveal that
-nCoV has the highest nucleotide sequence identity with SARS-CoV (.%)
among the six other known pathogenic HCoVs. Specifically, the envelope and
nucleocapsid proteins of -nCoV are two evolutionarily conserved regions, having
the sequence identities of % and .%, respectively, compared to SARS-CoV.
Using network proximity analyses of drug targets and known HCoV-host interactions in
the human protein-protein interactome, we computationally identified  putative
repurposable drugs for the potential prevention and treatment of HCoVs. In addition, we
prioritized  potential anti-HCoV repurposable drugs (including melatonin,
mercaptopurine, and sirolimus) that were further validated by enrichment analyses of
drug-gene signatures and HCoV-induced transcriptomics data in human cell lines.
Finally, we showcased three potential drug combinations (including sirolimus plus
dactinomycin, mercaptopurine plus melatonin, and toremifene plus emodin) captured by


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

the ‘Complementary Exposure’ pattern: the targets of the drugs both hit the HCoV-host
subnetwork, but target separate neighborhoods in the human protein-protein
interactome network. In summary, this study offers powerful network-based
methodologies for rapid identification of candidate repurposable drugs and potential
drug combinations toward future clinical trials for HCoVs.

Introduction
Coronaviruses (CoVs) typically affect the respiratory tract of mammals, including
humans, and lead to mild to severe respiratory tract infections []. In the past  decades,
two highly pathogenic human CoVs (HCoVs), including severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV), emerging from animal reservoirs, have led to global epidemics with high
morbidity and mortality[]. For example, , individuals were infected and  died in
the SARS-CoV pandemic, which cost the global economy with an estimated $ to
$ billion[, ]. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), as of November
, MERS-CoV has had a total of , diagnosed cases causing  deaths, the
majority in Saudi Arabia[]. In December , the third pathogenic HCoV, named 
novel coronavirus (-nCoV), was found in Wuhan, China. As of February , ,
there have been over , cases with ~ deaths for the -nCoV pandemic
(https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/-ncov/index.html); furthermore, human-to-human
transmission has occurred among close contacts[]. However, there are currently no
effective medications against -nCoV. Several national and international research


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

groups are working on the development of vaccines to prevent and treat the nCoV, but effective vaccines are not available yet. There is an urgent need for the
development of effective prevention and treatment strategies for -nCoV outbreak.
Although investment in biomedical and pharmaceutical research and
development has increased significantly over the past two decades, the annual number
of new treatments approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has
remained relatively constant and limited[]. A recent study estimated that pharmaceutical
companies spent $. billion in , up from $ million in , in the development
of an FDA-approved new chemical entity drug[]. Drug repurposing, represented as an
effective drug discovery strategy from existing drugs, could significantly shorten the time
and reduce the cost compared to de novo drug discovery and randomized clinical
trials[-]. However, experimental approaches for drug repurposing is costly and timeconsuming.[] Computational approaches offer novel testable hypotheses for
systematic drug repositioning[-, , ]. However, traditional structure-based methods
are limited when three-dimensional (D) structures of proteins are unavailable, which,
unfortunately, is the case for the majority of human and viral targets. In addition,
targeting single virus proteins often have high risk of drug resistance by the rapid
evolution of virus genomes [].
Viruses (including HCoV) require host cellular factors for successful replication
during infections[]. Systematic identification of virus-host protein-protein interactions
(PPIs) offers an effective way toward elucidation of the mechanisms of viral infection[,
]

. Subsequently, targeting cellular antiviral targets, such as virus-host interactome,

may offer a novel strategy for the development of effective treatments for viral


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

infections[], including SARS-CoV[], MERS-CoV[], Ebola virus[], and Zika virus[, ]

. We recently presented an integrated antiviral drug discovery pipeline that

incorporated gene-trap insertional mutagenesis, known functional drug-gene network,
and bioinformatics analyses[]. This methodology allows to identify several candidate
repurposable drugs for Ebola virus[, ]. Our work over the last decade has
demonstrated how network strategies can, for example, be used to identify effective
repurposable drugs[, -] and drug combinations[] for multiple human diseases. For
example, network-based drug-disease proximity that sheds light on the relationship
between drugs (e.g., drug targets) and disease modules (molecular determinants in
disease pathobiology modules within the PPIs), and can serve as a useful tool for
efficient screening of potentially new indications for approved drugs, as well as drug
combinations, as demonstrated in our recent studies[, , ].
In this study, we present an integrative, antiviral drug repurposing methodology
that combines a systems pharmacology-based network medicine platform that
quantifies the interplay between the virus-host interactome and drug targets in the
human PPI network. The basis for these experiments rests on the notions that (i) the
proteins that functionally associate with viral infection (including HCoV) are localized in
the corresponding subnetwork within the comprehensive human PPI network[]; and (ii)
proteins that serve as drug targets for a specific disease may also be suitable drug
targets for potential antiviral infection owing to common PPIs and functional pathways
elucidated by the human interactome (Figure ). We follow this analysis with
bioinformatics validation of drug-induced gene signatures and HCoV-induced



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

transcriptomics in human cell lines to inspect the postulated mechanism-of-action in a
specific HCoV for which we propose repurposing (Figure ).

Results
Phylogenetic Analyses of -nCoV
To date,  pathogenic HCoVs (Figure A and B) have been found[, ]: (i) -nCoV,
SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, HCoV-OC, and HCoV-HKU are b genera, and (ii) HCoVNL and HCoV-E are a genera. We performed the phylogenetic analyses using the
whole genome sequence data from  HCoVs to inspect the evolutionary relationship of
-nCoV with other HCoVs. We found that the whole genomes of -nCoV had
~.% nucleotide sequence identity across three diagnosed patients (Supplementary
Table S). The -nCoV shares the highest nucleotide sequence identity (.%)
with SARS-CoV among the  other known pathogenic HCoVs, revealing conserved
evolutionary relationship between -nCoV and SARS-CoV (Figure A).
HCoVs have five major protein regions for virus structure assembly and viral
replications[], including replicase complex (ORFab), spike (S), envelope (E),
membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N) proteins (Figure B). The ORFab gene encodes
the non-structural proteins (nsp) of viral RNA synthesis complex through proteolytic
processing[]. The nsp is a viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, together with cofactors nsp and nsp possessing high polymerase activity. From the protein threedimensional (D) structure view of SARS-CoV nsp, it contains a larger N-terminal
extension (which binds to nsp and nsp) and polymerase domain (Figure C). The


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

spike is a transmembrane glycoprotein that plays a pivotal role in mediating viral
infection through binding the host receptor[, ]. Figure D shows the D structure of
the spike protein bound with the host receptor angiotensin converting enznyme (ACE)
in SARS-CoV (PDB ID: ACK). A recent study showed that -nCoV is able to utilize
ACE as an entry receptor in ACE-expressing cells[], suggesting potential drug
targets for therapeutic development. In addition, the nucleocapsid is also an important
subunit for packaging the viral genome through protein oligomerization[], and the
single nucleocapsid structure was shown in Figure E.
Protein sequence alignment analyses indicated that the -nCoV was most
evolutionarily conserved with SARS-CoV (Supplementary Table S). Specifically, the
envelope and nucleocapsid proteins of -nCoV are two evolutionarily conserved
regions, with sequence identities of % and .%, respectively, compared to SARSCoV (Supplementary Table S). However, the spike protein exhibited the lowest
sequence conservation (sequence identity of %) between -nCoV and SARSCoV. Meanwhile, the spike protein of -nCoV only has .% sequence identity
compared to MERS-CoV.

HCoV-host Interactome Network
First, we assembled the CoV-associated host proteins from  known HCoVs (SARSCoV, MERS-CoV, HCoV-E, and HCoV-NL), one mouse MHV, and one avian IBV
(N protein) (Supplementary Table S). In total, we obtained  host proteins
associated with CoVs with various experimental evidences. Specifically, these host


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

proteins are either the direct targets of HCoV proteins or are involved in crucial
pathways of HCoV infection. The HCoV-host interactome network is shown in Figure
A. We identified several hub proteins including JUN, XPO, NPM, and HNRNPA,
with the highest number of connections within the  proteins. KEGG pathway
enrichment analysis revealed multiple significant biological pathways (adjusted P value
< .), including measles, RNA transport, NF-kappa B signaling, Epstein-Barr virus
infection, and influenza (Figure B). Gene ontology (GO) biological process enrichment
analyses further confirmed multiple viral infection-related processes (adjusted P value <
.), including viral life cycle, modulation by virus of host morphology or physiology,
viral process, positive regulation of viral life cycle, transport of virus, and virion
attachment to host cell (Figure C). We then mapped the known drug-target network
(see Methods) into the HCoV-host interactome to search for druggable, cellular targets.
We found that  human proteins (%, blue nodes in Figure A) can be targeted by at
least one approved drug or experimental drug under clinical trial. For example, GSKB,
DPP, SMAD, PARP, and IKBKB are the most targetable proteins. The high
druggability of HCoV-host interactome motivates us to develop a therapeutic strategy by
specifically targeting cellular proteins associated with HCoVs, such as drug repurposing.

Network-based Drug Repurposing for HCoVs
The basis for the proposed network-based drug repurposing methodologies rests on the
notions that the proteins that associate with and functionally govern a viral infection are
localized in the corresponding subnetwork (Figure A) within the comprehensive
human interactome network. For a drug with multiple targets to be effective against an


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

HCoV, its target proteins should be within or in the immediate vicinity of the
corresponding subnetwork in the human interactome (Figure ), as we demonstrated in
multiple diseases [, , , ] using this drug repurposing strategy. We used a state-ofthe-art network proximity measure to quantify the relationship between HCoV-specific
subnetwork (Figure A) and drug targets in the human protein-protein interactome. We
constructed a drug-target network by assembling target information for more than ,
FDA-approved or experimental drugs (see Methods). To improve the quality and
completeness of the human protein interactome network, we integrated PPIs with five
types of experimental data: () binary PPIs from D protein structures; () binary PPIs
from unbiased high-throughput yeast-two-hybrid assays; () experimentally identified
kinase-substrate interactions; () signaling networks derived from experimental data;
and () literature-derived PPIs with various experimental evidences (see Methods). We
used a Z-score (Z) measure and permutation test to reduce the study bias in network
proximity analyses (including hub nodes in the human interactome network by literaturederived PPI data bias) as described in our recent studies[, ].
In total, we computationally identified  drugs that were associated (Z < -.
and P < ., permutation test) with the HCoV-host interactome (Figure A and
Supplementary Table S). To validate bias of the pooled cellular proteins from  CoVs,
we further calculated the network proximities of all the drugs for  CoVs with a high
enough number of know host proteins, including SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, IBV, and
MHV, separately. We found that the Z-scores showed consistency among the pooled
 HCoV-associated proteins and other  individual CoVs (Figure B). The Pearson
correlation coefficients of the proximities of all the drugs for the pooled HCoV are .


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

vs. SARS-CoV (P < ., t distribution), . vs. MERS-CoV (P < .), . vs.
IBV (P < .), and . vs. MHV (P < .). These network proximity analyses
offer putative repurposable candidates for potential prevention and treatment of HCoVs.

Discovery of Repurposable Drugs for HCoV
To further validate the  repurposable drugs against HCoVs, we first performed gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using transcriptome data of MERS-CoV and SARSCoV infected host cells (see Methods). These transcriptome data were used as gene
signatures for HCoVs. Additionally, we downloaded the expression data of drug-treated
human cell lines from the Connectivity Map (CMAP) database [] to obtain drug-gene
signatures. We calculated a GSEA score (see Methods) for each drug and used this
score as an indication of bioinformatics validation of the  drugs. Specifically, an
enrichment score (ES) was calculated for each HCoV data set, and ES >  and P < .
(permutation test) was used as cut-off for a significant association of gene signatures
between a drug and a specific HCoV. The GSEA score, ranging from  to , is the
number of data sets that met these criteria for a specific drug. Mesalazine (an approved
drug for inflammatory bowel disease), sirolimus (an approved immunosuppressive
drug), and equilin (an approved agonist of the estrogen receptor for menopausal
symptoms) achieved the highest GSEA scores of , followed by paroxetine and
melatonin with GSEA scores of . We next selected  potential repurposable drugs
(Figure A and Table ) against HCoVs using subject matter expertise based on a
combination of factors: (i) strength of the network-predicted associations (a smaller
network proximity score in Supplementary Table S); (ii) validation by GSEA analyses;


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

(iii) literature-reported antiviral evidences, and (iv) fewer clinically reported side effects.
Specifically, we showcased several selected repurposable drugs with literature-reported
antiviral evidences as below.
Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs). An overexpression of
estrogen receptor has been shown to play a crucial role in inhibiting viral replication[].
SERMs have been reported to play a broader role in inhibiting viral replication through
the non-classical pathways associated with estrogen receptor[]. SERMs interfere at the
post viral entry step and affect the triggering of fusion, as the SERMs’ antiviral activity
still can be observed in the absence of detectable estrogen receptor expression[].
Toremifene (Z = -., Figure A), the first generation of nonsteroidal SERM, exhibits
potential effects in blocking various viral infections, including MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV,
and Ebola virus in established cell lines[, ]. Interestingly, different from the classical
ESR-related antiviral pathway, toremifene prevents fusion between the viral and
endosomal membrane by interacting with and destabilizing the virus membrane
glycoprotein, and eventually inhibiting viral replication[]. As shown in Figure B,
toremifene potentially affects several key host proteins associated with HCoV, such as
RPL, HNRNPA, NPM, EIFI, EIFF, and EIFE[, ]. Equilin (Z = -. and GSEA
score = ), an estrogenic steroid produced by horses, also has been proven to have
moderate activity in inhibiting the entry of Zaire Ebola virus-glycoprotein and human
immunodeficiency virus (ZEBOV-GP/HIV)[]. Altogether, network-predicted SERMs
(such as toremifene and equilin) offer potential repurposable candidates for HCoVs.
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs). ARBs have been reported to associate
with viral infection, including HCoVs[-]. Irbesartan (Z = -.), a typical ARB, was


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

approved by the FDA for treatment of hypertension and diabetic nephropathy. Here,
network proximity analysis shows a significant association between Irbesartan’s targets
and HCoV-associated host proteins in the human interactome. As shown in Figure C,
irbesartan targets SLCA, encoding the sodium/bile acid cotransporter (NTCP)
protein that has been identified as a functional preS-specific receptor for the hepatitis
B virus (HBV) and the hepatitis delta virus (HDV). Irbesartan can inhibit NTCP, thus
inhibiting viral entry[, ]. SLCA interacts with Corf, a potential transcriptional
repressor that interacts with nsp- of SARS-CoV[]. There are several other ARBs
(such as eletriptan, frovatriptan, and zolmitriptan) in which their targets are potentially
associated with HCoV-associated host proteins in the human interactome.
Immunosuppressant or antineoplastic agents. Previous studies have
confirmed the mammalian target of rapamycin complex  (mTORC) as the key factor
in regulating various viruses’ replications, including Andes orthohantavirus and
coronavirus[, ]. Sirolimus (Z = -. and GSEA score = ), an inhibitor of mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR), was reported to effectively block viral protein expression
and virion release effectively[]. Indeed, the latest study revealed the clinical
application: sirolimus reduced MERS-CoV infection by over %[]. Moreover, sirolimus
usage in managing patients with severe HN pneumonia and acute respiratory failure
can improve those patients’ prognosis significantly[]. Mercaptopurine (Z = -. and
GSEA score = ), an antineoplastic agent with immunosuppressant property, has been
used to treat cancer since the s and expanded its application to several autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and
Crohn’s disease[]. Mercaptopurine has been reported as a selective inhibitor of both


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV by targeting papain-like protease which plays key roles in
viral maturation and antagonism to interferon stimulation[, ]. Mechanistically,
mercaptopurine potentially target several host proteins in HCoVs, such as JUN,
PABPC, NPM, and NCL[, ] (Figure D).
Anti-inflammatory agents. Inflammatory pathways play essential roles in viral
infections[, ]. As a biogenic amine, melatonin (N-acetyl--methoxytryptamine) (Z = . and GSEA score = ) plays a key role in various biological processes, and offers a
potential strategy in the management of viral infections[, ]. Viral infections are often
associated with immune-inflammatory injury, in which the level of oxidative stress
increases significantly and leaves negative effects on multiple organ functions[]. The
antioxidant effect of melatonin makes it a putative candidate drug to relieve patients’
clinical symptoms in antiviral treatment, even though melatonin cannot eradicate or
even curb the viral replication or transcription[, ]. In addition, the application of
melatonin may prolong patients’ survival time, which may provide a chance for patients’
immune systems to recover and eventually eradicate the virus. As shown in Figure E,
melatonin indirectly targets several HCoV cellular targets, including ACE, BCLL,
JUN, and IKBKB. Eplerenone (Z = -.), an aldosterone receptor antagonist, is
reported to have a similar anti-inflammatory effect as melatonin. By inhibiting mast-cellderived proteinases and suppressing fibrosis, eplerenone can improve survival of mice
infected with encephalomyocarditis virus[].
In summary, our network proximity analyses offer multiple putative repurposable
drugs that target diverse cellular pathways for potential prevention and treatment of



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

HCoVs. However, further preclinical experiments and clinical trials are required to verify
the clinical benefits of these network-predicted candidates before clinical use.

Network-based Identification of Potential Drug Combinations for HCoV
Drug combinations, offering increased therapeutic efficacy and reduced toxicity, play an
important role in treating various viral infections[]. However, our ability to identify and
validate effective combinations is limited by a combinatorial explosion, driven by both
the large number of drug pairs and dosage combinations. In our recent study, we
proposed a novel network-based methodology to identify clinically efficacious drug
combinations[]. Relying on approved drug combinations for hypertension and cancer,
we found that a drug combination was therapeutically effective only if it was captured by
the ‘Complementary Exposure’ pattern: the targets of the drugs both hit the disease
module, but target separate neighborhoods (Figure A). Here we sought to identify
drug combinations that may provide a synergistic effect in treating HCoVs with welldefined mechanism-of-action by network analysis. For the  potential repurposable
drugs (Figure A), we showcased three network-predicted candidate drug
combinations in the potential treatment of HCoVs.
Sirolimus plus Dactinomycin. Sirolimus, an inhibitor of mTOR with both
antifungal and antineoplastic properties, has demonstrated to improves outcomes in
patients with severe HN pneumonia and acute respiratory failure[]. The mTOR
signaling plays an essential role for MERS-CoV infection[]. Dactinomycin, also known
actinomycin D, is an approved RNA synthesis inhibitor for treatment of various cancer


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

types. An early study showed that dactinomycin ( microgram/ml) inhibited the growth of
feline enteric CoV[]. As shown in Figure B, our network analysis shows that sirolimus
and dactinomycin synergistically target HCoV-associated host protein subnetwork by
‘Complementary Exposure’ pattern, offering potential combination regimens for
treatment of HCoV. Specifically, sirolimus and dactinomycin may inhibit both mTOR
signaling and RNA synthesis pathway (including DNA topoisomerase -alpha (TOPA)
and DNA topoisomerase -beta (TOPB)) in HCoV infected cells (Figure B).
Toremifene plus Emodin. Toremifene is the approved first generation
nonsteroidal SERMs for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer[]. SERMs (including
toremifene) inhibited Ebola virus infection[] by interacting with and destabilizing the
Ebola virus glycoprotein[]. In vitro assays have demonstrated that toremifene inhibited
growth of MERS-CoV[, ] and SARA-CoV[] (Table ). Emodin, an anthraquinone
derivative extracted from the roots of rheum tanguticum, have been reported to have
various anti-virus effects. Specifically, emdoin inhibited SARS-CoV associated a
protein[], and blocked an interaction between the SARS-CoV spike protein and
ACE[]. Altogether, network analyses and published experimental data suggested that
combining toremifene and emdoin offered a potential therapeutic approach for HCoVs
(Figure C).
Mercaptopurine plus Melatonin. As shown in Figure A, targets of both
mercaptopurine and melatonin showed strong network proximity with HCoV-associated
host proteins in the human interactome network. Recent in vitro and in vivo studies
identified mercaptopurine as a selective inhibitor of both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV by
targeting papain-like protease [, ]. Melatonin was reported in potential treatment of


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

viral infection via its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects[-]. Melatonin indirectly
regulates ACE expression, a key entry receptor involved in viral infection of HCoVs,
including -nCoV[]. JUN, also known as c-Jun, is a key host protein involving in
HCoV infectious bronchitis virus[]. As shown in Figure D, mercaptopurine and
melatonin may synergistically block c-Jun signaling by targeting multiple cellular targets.
In summary, combination of mercaptopurine and melatonin may offer a potential
combination therapy for -nCoV by synergistically targeting papain-like protease,
ACE, c-Jun signaling, and anti-inflammatory pathways (Figure D). However, further
experimental and clinical validations are highly warranted.

Discussion
In this study, we presented a network-based methodology for systematic identification of
putative repurposable drugs and drug combinations for potential treatment of HCoV.
Integration of drug-target networks, HCoV-host interactions, HCoV-induced
transcriptome in human cell lines, and human protein-protein interactome network are
essential for such identification. Based on comprehensive evaluation, we prioritized 
putative repurposable drugs (Figure ) and  putative drug combinations (Figure ) for
the potential treatment of HCoVs, including -nCoV. However, all network-predicted
repurposable drugs and drug combinations must be validated in preclinical models and
randomized clinical trials before being used in patients.
We acknowledge several limitations in our current study. In this study, we used a
low binding affinity value of  µM as a threshold to define a physical drug-target


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

interaction. However, a stronger binding affinity threshold (e.g., µM) may be a more
suitable cut-off in drug discovery, although it will generate a smaller drug-target network.
Although sizeable efforts were made for assembling large-scale, experimentally
reported drug-target networks from publicly available databases, the network data may
be incomplete and some drug-protein interactions may be functional associations,
instead of physical bindings. We may use computational approaches to systematically
predict the drug-target interactions further[, ]. In addition, the collected virus-host
interactions are far from complete and the quality can be influenced by multiple factors,
including different experimental assays and human cell line models. We may
computationally predict a new virus-host interactome for HCoVs using sequence-based
and structure-based approaches[]. The current systems pharmacology model cannot
separate therapeutic antiviral effects from those predictions due to lack of detailed
pharmacological effects of drug targets and unknown functional consequences of virushost interactions. Drug targets representing nodes within cellular networks are often
intrinsically coupled with both therapeutic and adverse profiles[], as drugs can inhibit or
activate protein functions (including antagonists versus agonists). Comprehensive
identification of the virus-host interactome for -nCoV, with specific biological effects
using functional genomics assays[, ], will significantly improve the accuracy of current
network-based methodologies.
Owing to lack of the complete drug target information (such as the molecular
‘promiscuity’ of drugs), the dose-response and dose-toxicity effects for both
repurposable drugs and drug combinations cannot be identified in current network
models. For example, Mesalazine, an approved drug for inflammatory bowel disease, is


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

a top network-predicted candidate drug (Figure A) associated with HCoVs. Yet,
several clinical studies showed the potential pulmonary toxicities (including pneumonia)
associated with mesalazine usage [, ]. Preclinical studies are warranted to evaluate in
vivo efficiency and side effects before clinical trials. Furthermore, we only limited to
predict pairwise drug combinations based on our previous network-based framework[].
However, we expect that our methodology reminds to be a useful network-based tools
for prediction of combining multiple drugs toward exploring network relationships of
multiple drugs’ targets with the HCoV-host subnetwork in the human interactome.
Finally, we aimed to systematically identify repurposable drugs by specifically targeting
nCoV host proteins only. Thus, our current network models cannot predict repurposable
drugs from the existing anti-virus drugs that target virus proteins only. Thus,
combination of the existing anti-virus drugs (such as remdesivir[]) with the networkpredicted repurposable drugs (Figure ) or drug combinations (Figure ) may improve
coverage of current network-based methodologies by utilizing multi-layer network
framework.
In conclusion, this study offers a powerful, integrated network-based systems
pharmacology methodology for rapid identification of repurposable drugs and drug
combinations for the potential treatment of HCoV. Our approach can minimize the
translational gap between preclinical testing results and clinical outcomes, which is a
significant problem in the rapid development of efficient treatment strategies for the
emerging -nCoV outbreak. From a translational perspective, if broadly applied, the
network tools developed here could help develop effective treatment strategies for other
types of virus and human diseases as well.


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

Methods and Materials
Genome Information and Phylogenetic analysis
In total, we collected DNA sequences and protein sequences for  HCoVs, including
three most recent -nCoV genomes, from the NCBI GenBank database (January
, , Supplementary Table S). Whole genome alignment and protein sequence
identity calculation were performed by Multiple Sequence Alignment in EMBL-EBI
database with default parameters. The neighbor joining (NJ) tree was computed from
the pairwise phylogenetic distance matrix using MEGA X[] with  bootstrap
replicates. The protein alignment and phylogenetic tree of HCoVs were constructed by
MEGA X.

Building the Virus-Host Interactome
We collected HCoV-host protein interactions from various literatures based on our
sizeable efforts. The HCoV-associated host proteins of several HCoVs, including SARSCoV, MERS-CoV, IBV, MHV, HCoV-E, and HCoV-NL were pooled. These
proteins were either the direct targets of HCoV proteins or were involved in critical
pathways of HCoV infection identified by multiple experimental sources, including high
throughput yeast-two-hybrid (YH) systems, viral protein pull-down assay, in vitro coimmunoprecipitation and RNA knock down experiment. In total, the virus-host
interaction network included  HCoVs with  host proteins (Supplementary Table
S).


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

Functional Enrichment Analysis
Next, we performed Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene
Ontology (GO) enrichment analyses to evaluate the biological relevance and functional
pathways of the HCoV-associated proteins. All functional analyses were performed
using Enrichr[].

Building the Drug-Target Network
Here, we collected drug-target interaction information from the DrugBank database
(v.)[], Therapeutic Target Database (TTD)[], PharmGKB database, ChEMBL
(v)[], BindingDB[], and IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY[]. The chemical
structure of each drug with SMILES format was extracted from DrugBank[]. Here, only
drug-target interactions meeting the following three criteria were used: (i) binding
affinities, including Ki, Kd, IC or EC each ≤  μM; (ii) the target was marked as
‘reviewed’ in the UniProt database[]; and (iii) the human target was represented by a
unique UniProt accession number. The details for building the experimentally validated
drug-target network are provided in our recent study[].

Building the Human Protein-Protein Interactome
To build a comprehensive list of human PPIs, we assembled data from a total of 
bioinformatics and systems biology databases with five types of experimental


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

evidences: (i) Binary PPIs tested by high-throughput yeast-two-hybrid (YH) systems;
(ii) Binary, physical PPIs from protein three-dimensional (D) structures; (iii) Kinasesubstrate interactions by literature-derived low-throughput or high-throughput
experiments; (iv) Signaling network by literature-derived low-throughput experiments;
and (v) Literature-curated PPIs identified by affinity purification followed by mass
spectrometry (AP-MS), YH, or by literature-derived low-throughput experiments. All
inferred data, including evolutionary analysis, gene expression data, and metabolic
associations, were excluded. The genes were mapped to their Entrez ID based on the
NCBI database[] as well as their official gene symbols based on GeneCards
(https://www.genecards.org/). In total, the resulting human protein-protein interactome
used in this study includes , unique PPIs (edges or links) connecting ,
proteins (nodes), representing a % increase in the number of the PPIs we have used
previously. Detailed descriptions for building the human protein-protein interactome are
provided in our previous studies[, , ].

Network Proximity Measure
We posit that the human PPIs provide an unbiased, rational roadmap for repurposing
drugs for potential treatment of HCoVs in which they were not originally approved.
Given 𝐶, the set of host genes associated with a specific HCoV, and 𝑇, the set of drug
targets, we computed the network proximity of 𝐶 with the target set 𝑇 of each drug using
the “closest” method:
〈𝑑%& 〉 =

)
*|%|*,‖&‖

.∑∈% 𝑚𝑖𝑛∈& 𝑑 (𝑐, 𝑡) + ∑∈& 𝑚𝑖𝑛∈% 𝑑 (𝑐, 𝑡)<

()


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

where 𝑑 (𝑐, 𝑡) is the shortest distance between gene 𝑐 and 𝑡 in the human protein
interactome. The network proximity was converted to Z-score based on permutation
tests:
𝑍>?@ =

CCCBC
>?@ A>

()

DB

where CCC
𝑑E and 𝜎E were the mean and standard deviation of the permutation test repeated
, times, each time with two randomly selected gene lists with similar degree
distributions to those of 𝐶 and 𝑇. The corresponding P value was calculated based on
the permutation test results. Z-score < -. and P < . were considered significantly
proximal drug-HCoV associations. All networks were visualized using Gephi ..
(https://gephi.org/).

Network-based Rational Design of Drug Combination Prediction
For this network-based approach for drug combinations to be effective, we need to
establish if the topological relationship between two drug-target modules reflects
biological and pharmacological relationships, while also quantifying their network-based
relationship between drug-targets and HCoV-associated host proteins (drug-drug-HCoV
combinations). To identify potential drug combinations, we combined the top lists of
drugs. Then, “separation” measure 𝑆HI was calculated for each pair of drugs 𝐴 and 𝐵
using the following method:
𝑆HI = 〈𝑑HI 〉 −

〈>MM 〉,〈>NN 〉
O

()



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

where 〈𝑑∙ 〉 was calculated based on the “closest” method. Our key methodology is that a
drug combination is therapeutically effective only if it follows a specific relationship to
the disease module, as captured by Complementary Exposure patterns in targets’
modules of both drugs without overlapping toxic mechanisms.[]

Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
We performed the gene set enrichment analysis as an additional prioritization method.
We first collected three differential gene expression data sets of hosts infected by
HCoVs from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Among them, two
transcriptome data sets were SARS-CoV infected samples from patient’s peripheral
blood[] (GSE) and Calu- cells[] (GSE) respectively. One transcriptome
data set was MERS-CoV infected Calu- cells[] (GSE). Adjusted P value less
than . was defined as differentially expressed genes. These data sets were used as
HCoV host signatures to evaluate the treatment effects of drugs. Differential gene
expression in cells treated with various drugs were retrieved from the Connectivity Map
(CMAP) database[], and were used as gene profiles for the drugs. For each drug that
was in both the CMAP data set and our drug-target network, we calculated an
enrichment score (ES) for each HCoV signature data set based on previously described
methods[] as follows:
𝐸𝑆 − 𝐸𝑆>UVW , 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝐸𝑆ST ) ≠ 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝐸𝑆>UVW )
𝐸𝑆 = R ST
, 𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒

()



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

𝐸𝑆ST and 𝐸𝑆>UVW were calculated separately for the up- and down-regulated genes from
the HCoV signature data set using the same method. We first computed 𝑎ST/>UVW and
𝑏ST/>UVW as:
e

𝑎 = max gf −

h(e)

)dedf

𝑏 = max g
)dedf

h(e)
E

−

E

i

eA)
f

i

()

()

where 𝑗 = ,, ⋯ , 𝑠 were the genes of HCoV signature data set sorted in ascending
order by their rank in the gene profiles of the drug being evaluated. The rank of gene 𝑗
is denoted by 𝑉 (𝑗), where  ≤ 𝑉 (𝑗) ≤ 𝑟, with 𝑟 being the number of genes (,) from
the drug profile. Then, 𝐸𝑆ST/>UVW was set to 𝑎ST/>UVW if 𝑎ST/>UVW > 𝑏ST/>UVW , and was
set to −𝑏ST/>UVW if 𝑏ST/>UVW > 𝑎ST/>UVW . Permutation tests repeated  times using
randomly generated gene lists with the same number of up- and down-regulated genes
as the HCoV signature data set were performed to measure the significance of the ES
scores. Drugs were considered to have potential treatment effect if ES >  and P < .,
and the number of such HCoV signature data sets were used as the final GSEA score
that ranges from  to . “NA” indicates that the drug cannot be evaluated by this method
due to the lack of the drug profile.



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
F.C. conceived the study. Y.Z. and Y.H. developed the network methodology and
performed all computational experiments. J.S., Y.Z., Y.H., Y.H., and W.M. performed
data analysis. F.C., Y.Z. and Y.H. and J.S. wrote and critically revised the manuscript
with contributions from other co-authors.

Competing Interests: The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect
the views of the Cleveland Clinic. The authors declare no competing interests.

Data and Code Availability: All codes and predicted repurposable drugs can be
freely accessed at: https://github.com/ChengF-Lab/-nCoV

References
.

Zumla A, Chan JF, Azhar EI, Hui DS, Yuen KY. Coronaviruses - drug discovery and

therapeutic options. Nat Rev Drug Discov. ; ():-. doi: ./nrd...
.

Paules CI, Marston HD, Fauci AS. Coronavirus Infections-More Than Just the Common

Cold. JAMA. . doi: ./jama...
.

de Wit E, van Doremalen N, Falzarano D, Munster VJ. SARS and MERS: recent insights

into emerging coronaviruses. Nat Rev Microbiol. ; ():-. doi:
./nrmicro...
.

de Wilde AH, Snijder EJ, Kikkert M, van Hemert MJ. Host Factors in Coronavirus

Replication. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. ; :-. doi: ./__.
.

Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, Ren R, Leung KSM, Lau EHY, Wong JY,

Xing X, Xiang N, Wu Y, Li C, Chen Q, Li D, Liu T, Zhao J, Li M, Tu W, Chen C, Jin L, Yang R,


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

Wang Q, Zhou S, Wang R, Liu H, Luo Y, Liu Y, Shao G, Li H, Tao Z, Yang Y, Deng Z, Liu B, Ma
Z, Zhang Y, Shi G, Lam TTY, Wu JTK, Gao GF, Cowling BJ, Yang B, Leung GM, Feng Z. Early
transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia. N Engl J
Med. . doi: ./NEJMoa.
.

Greene JA, Loscalzo J. Putting the patient back together - Social medicine, network

medicine, and the limits of reductionism. N Engl J Med. ; ():-. doi:
./NEJMms.
.

Avorn J. The $. billion pill--methodologic and policy considerations. N Engl J Med.

; ():-. doi: ./NEJMp.
.

Cheng F. In silico oncology drug repositioning and polypharmacology. Methods Mol Biol.

; :-. doi: ./----_.
.

Cheng F, Hong H, Yang S, Wei Y. Individualized network-based drug repositioning

infrastructure for precision oncology in the panomics era. Brief Bioinform. ; ():-.
doi: ./bib/bbw.
.

Cheng F, Murray JL, Rubin DH. Drug repurposing: New treatments for Zika virus

infection? Trends Mol Med. ; ():-. doi: ./j.molmed....
.

Santos R, Ursu O, Gaulton A, Bento AP, Donadi RS, Bologa CG, Karlsson A, Al-

Lazikani B, Hersey A, Oprea TI, Overington JP. A comprehensive map of molecular drug
targets. Nat Rev Drug Discov. ; ():-. doi: ./nrd...
.

Cheng F, Desai RJ, Handy DE, Wang R, Schneeweiss S, Barabasi AL, Loscalzo J.

Network-based approach to prediction and population-based validation of in silico drug
repurposing. Nat Commun. ; ():. doi: ./s---.
.

Cheng F, Murray JL, Zhao J, Sheng J, Zhao Z, Rubin DH. Systems biology-based

investigation of cellular antiviral drug targets identified by gene-trap insertional mutagenesis.
PLoS Comput Biol. ; ():e. doi: ./journal.pcbi..
.

Yang S, Fu C, Lian X, Dong X, Zhang Z. Understanding human-virus protein-protein

interactions using a human protein complex-based analysis framework. mSystems. ; ().
doi: ./mSystems.-.
.

Liu C, Ma Y, Zhao J, Nussinov R, Zhang Y, Cheng F, Zhang Z. Computational network

biology: Data, models, and applications. DOI: ./j.physrep.... Physics Reports.
.
.

Dyall J, Coleman CM, Hart BJ, Venkataraman T, Holbrook MR, Kindrachuk J, Johnson

RF, Olinger GG, Jr., Jahrling PB, Laidlaw M, Johansen LM, Lear-Rooney CM, Glass PJ,
Hensley LE, Frieman MB. Repurposing of clinically developed drugs for treatment of Middle


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. ;
():-. doi: ./AAC.-.
.

Johansen LM, Brannan JM, Delos SE, Shoemaker CJ, Stossel A, Lear C, Hoffstrom BG,

Dewald LE, Schornberg KL, Scully C, Lehar J, Hensley LE, White JM, Olinger GG. FDAapproved selective estrogen receptor modulators inhibit Ebola virus infection. Sci Transl Med.
; ():ra. doi: ./scitranslmed..
.

He S, Lin B, Chu V, Hu Z, Hu X, Xiao J, Wang AQ, Schweitzer CJ, Li Q, Imamura M,

Hiraga N, Southall N, Ferrer M, Zheng W, Chayama K, Marugan JJ, Liang TJ. Repurposing of
the antihistamine chlorcyclizine and related compounds for treatment of hepatitis C virus
infection. Sci Transl Med. ; ():ra. doi: ./scitranslmed..
.

Barrows NJ, Campos RK, Powell ST, Prasanth KR, Schott-Lerner G, Soto-Acosta R,

Galarza-Munoz G, McGrath EL, Urrabaz-Garza R, Gao J, Wu P, Menon R, Saade G,
Fernandez-Salas I, Rossi SL, Vasilakis N, Routh A, Bradrick SS, Garcia-Blanco MA. A Screen
of FDA-Approved Drugs for Inhibitors of Zika Virus Infection. Cell Host Microbe. ;
():-. doi: ./j.chom....
.

Xu M, Lee EM, Wen Z, Cheng Y, Huang WK, Qian X, Tcw J, Kouznetsova J, Ogden SC,

Hammack C, Jacob F, Nguyen HN, Itkin M, Hanna C, Shinn P, Allen C, Michael SG, Simeonov
A, Huang W, Christian KM, Goate A, Brennand KJ, Huang R, Xia M, Ming GL, Zheng W, Song
H, Tang H. Identification of small-molecule inhibitors of Zika virus infection and induced neural
cell death via a drug repurposing screen. Nat Med. ; ():-. doi: ./nm..
.

Cheng F, Liu C, Jiang J, Lu W, Li W, Liu G, Zhou W, Huang J, Tang Y. Prediction of

drug-target interactions and drug repositioning via network-based inference. PLoS Comput Biol.
; ():e. doi: ./journal.pcbi..
.

Cheng F, Lu W, Liu C, Fang J, Hou Y, Handy DE, Wang R, Zhao Y, Yang Y, Huang J,

Hill DE, Vidal M, Eng C, Loscalzo J. A genome-wide positioning systems network algorithm for
in silico drug repurposing. Nat Commun. ; ():. doi: ./s---.
.

Zeng X, Zhu S, Liu X, Zhou Y, Nussinov R, Cheng F. deepDR: a network-based deep

learning approach to in silico drug repositioning. Bioinformatics. ; ():-. doi:
./bioinformatics/btz.
.

Zeng X, Zhu S, Lu W, Liu Z, Huang J, Zhou Y, Hou Y, Huang Y, Guo H, Fang J, Liu M,

Trapp D, Li L, Nussinov R, Eng C, Loscalzo J, Cheng F. Target identification among known
drugs by deep learning from heterogeneous networks. Chemical Science. ; DOI:
./CSCE.



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

.

Cheng F, Kovacs IA, Barabasi AL. Network-based prediction of drug combinations. Nat

Commun. ; ():. doi: ./s---x.
.

Menche J, Sharma A, Kitsak M, Ghiassian SD, Vidal M, Loscalzo J, Barabasi AL.

Disease networks. Uncovering disease-disease relationships through the incomplete
interactome. Science. ; ():. doi: ./science..
.

Forni D, Cagliani R, Clerici M, Sironi M. Molecular Evolution of Human Coronavirus

Genomes. Trends Microbiol. ; ():-. doi: ./j.tim....
.

Kirchdoerfer RN, Ward AB. Structure of the SARS-CoV nsp polymerase bound to

nsp and nsp co-factors. Nat Commun. ; ():. doi: ./s---.
.

Li F, Li W, Farzan M, Harrison SC. Structure of SARS Coronavirus Spike Receptor-

Binding Domain Complexed with Receptor. Science. ; ():-. doi:
./science..
.

Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, Niu P, Yang B, Wu H, Wang W, Song H, Huang B, Zhu N, Bi Y, Ma

X, Zhan F, Wang L, Hu T, Zhou H, Hu Z, Zhou W, Zhao L, Chen J, Meng Y, Wang J, Lin Y,
Yuan J, Xie Z, Ma J, Liu WJ, Wang D, Xu W, Holmes EC, Gao GF, Wu G, Chen W, Shi W, Tan
W. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of  novel coronavirus: implications for virus
origins and receptor binding. The Lancet. . doi: ./s-()-.
.

Zhou P, Yang X, Wang X, Hu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, Si H, Zhu Y, Li B, Huang C, Chen

H, Chen J, Luo Y, Guo H, Jiang R, Liu M, Chen Y, Shen X, Wang X, Zheng X, Zhao K, Chen Q,
Deng F, Liu L, Yan B, Zhan F, Wang Y, Xiao G, Shi Z. Discovery of a novel coronavirus
associated with the recent pneumonia outbreak in humans and its potential bat origin. ,
bioRxiv available: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/./...v.full.pdf.
.

Chang CK, Chen CM, Chiang MH, Hsu YL, Huang TH. Transient oligomerization of the

SARS-CoV N protein--implication for virus ribonucleoprotein packaging. PLoS One. ;
():e. doi: ./journal.pone..
.

Lamb J, Crawford ED, Peck D, Modell JW, Blat IC, Wrobel MJ, Lerner J, Brunet JP,

Subramanian A, Ross KN, Reich M, Hieronymus H, Wei G, Armstrong SA, Haggarty SJ,
Clemons PA, Wei R, Carr SA, Lander ES, Golub TR. The Connectivity Map: using geneexpression signatures to connect small molecules, genes, and disease. Science. ;
():-. doi: ./science..
.

Lasso G, Mayer SV, Winkelmann ER, Chu T, Elliot O, Patino-Galindo JA, Park K,

Rabadan R, Honig B, Shapira SD. A Structure-Informed Atlas of Human-Virus Interactions. Cell.
; ():-.e. doi: ./j.cell....



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

.

de Wilde AH, Jochmans D, Posthuma CC, Zevenhoven-Dobbe JC, van Nieuwkoop S,

Bestebroer TM, van den Hoogen BG, Neyts J, Snijder EJ. Screening of an FDA-approved
compound library identifies four small-molecule inhibitors of Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus replication in cell culture. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. ; ():-. doi:
./AAC.-.
.

Zhao Y, Ren J, Harlos K, Jones DM, Zeltina A, Bowden TA, Padilla-Parra S, Fry EE,

Stuart DI. Toremifene interacts with and destabilizes the Ebola virus glycoprotein. Nature. ;
():-. doi: ./nature.
.

Emmott E, Munday D, Bickerton E, Britton P, Rodgers MA, Whitehouse A, Zhou EM,

Hiscox JA. The cellular interactome of the coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus nucleocapsid
protein and functional implications for virus biology. J Virol. ; ():-. doi:
./JVI.-.
.

V'Kovski P, Gerber M, Kelly J, Pfaender S, Ebert N, Braga Lagache S, Simillion C,

Portmann J, Stalder H, Gaschen V, Bruggmann R, Stoffel MH, Heller M, Dijkman R, Thiel V.
Determination of host proteins composing the microenvironment of coronavirus replicase
complexes by proximity-labeling. Elife. ; . doi: ./eLife..
.

Moskowitz DW, Johnson FE. The central role of angiotensin I-converting enzyme in

vertebrate pathophysiology. Curr Top Med Chem. ; ():-. doi:
./.
.

Seko Y. Effect of the angiotensin II receptor blocker olmesartan on the development of

murine acute myocarditis caused by coxsackievirus B. Clin Sci (Lond). ; ():-.
doi: ./CS.
.

Erlandson KM, Kitch D, Wester CW, Kalayjian RC, Overton ET, Castillo-Mancilla J,

Koletar SL, Benson CA, Campbell TB, Robertson K, Lok JJ. The Impact of Statin and
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitor/Angiotensin Receptor Blocker Therapy on Cognitive
Function in Adults With Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection. Clin Infect Dis. ;
():-. doi: ./cid/cix.
.

Wang XJ, Hu W, Zhang TY, Mao YY, Liu NN, Wang SQ. Irbesartan, an FDA approved

drug for hypertension and diabetic nephropathy, is a potent inhibitor for hepatitis B virus entry by
disturbing Na(+)-dependent taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide activity. Antiviral Res.
; :-. doi: ./j.antiviral....
.

Ko C, Park WJ, Park S, Kim S, Windisch MP, Ryu WS. The FDA-approved drug

irbesartan inhibits HBV-infection in HepG cells stably expressing sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide. Antivir Ther. ; ():-. doi: ./IMP.


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

.

Hong M, Li W, Wang L, Jiang L, Liu L, Zhao H, Li Q. Identification of a novel

transcriptional repressor (HEPIS) that interacts with nsp- of SARS coronavirus. Viral
Immunol. ; ():-. doi: ./vim...
.

McNulty S, Flint M, Nichol ST, Spiropoulou CF. Host mTORC signaling regulates andes

virus replication. J Virol. ; ():-. doi: ./jvi.-.
.

Stohr S, Costa R, Sandmann L, Westhaus S, Pfaender S, Anggakusuma, Dazert E,

Meuleman P, Vondran FW, Manns MP, Steinmann E, von Hahn T, Ciesek S. Host cell
mTORC is required for HCV RNA replication. Gut. ; ():-. doi: ./gutjnl-.
.

Wang CH, Chung FT, Lin SM, Huang SY, Chou CL, Lee KY, Lin TY, Kuo HP. Adjuvant

treatment with a mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor, sirolimus, and steroids improves
outcomes in patients with severe HN pneumonia and acute respiratory failure. Crit Care Med.
; ():-. doi: ./CCM.bead.
.

Dyall J, Gross R, Kindrachuk J, Johnson RF, Olinger GG, Jr., Hensley LE, Frieman MB,

Jahrling PB. Middle East Respiratory Syndrome and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome:
Current Therapeutic Options and Potential Targets for Novel Therapies. Drugs. ;
():-. doi: ./s---.
.

Karran P, Attard N. Thiopurines in current medical practice: molecular mechanisms and

contributions to therapy-related cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. ; ():-. doi:
./nrc.
.

Chen X, Chou CY, Chang GG. Thiopurine analogue inhibitors of severe acute

respiratory syndrome-coronavirus papain-like protease, a deubiquitinating and deISGylating
enzyme. Antivir Chem Chemother. ; ():-. doi: ./.
.

Cheng KW, Cheng SC, Chen WY, Lin MH, Chuang SJ, Cheng IH, Sun CY, Chou CY.

Thiopurine analogs and mycophenolic acid synergistically inhibit the papain-like protease of
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Antiviral Res. ; :-. doi:
./j.antiviral....
.

Chen H, Wurm T, Britton P, Brooks G, Hiscox JA. Interaction of the coronavirus

nucleoprotein with nucleolar antigens and the host cell. J Virol. ; ():-. doi:
./jvi...-..
.

Rainsford KD. Influenza ("Bird Flu"), inflammation and anti-inflammatory/analgesic

drugs. Inflammopharmacology. ; (-):-. doi: ./s---.
.

Garcia CC, Guabiraba R, Soriani FM, Teixeira MM. The development of anti-

inflammatory drugs for infectious diseases. Discov Med. ; ():-.


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

.

Silvestri M, Rossi GA. Melatonin: its possible role in the management of viral infections--

a brief review. Ital J Pediatr. ; :. doi: ./---.
.

Srinivasan V, Mohamed M, Kato H. Melatonin in bacterial and viral infections with focus

on sepsis: a review. Recent Pat Endocr Metab Immune Drug Discov. ; ():-. doi:
./.
.

Tan DX, Korkmaz A, Reiter RJ, Manchester LC. Ebola virus disease: potential use of

melatonin as a treatment. J Pineal Res. ; ():-. doi: ./jpi..
.

Tan DX, Manchester LC, Terron MP, Flores LJ, Reiter RJ. One molecule, many

derivatives: a never-ending interaction of melatonin with reactive oxygen and nitrogen species?
J Pineal Res. ; ():-. doi: ./j.-X...x.
.

Galano A, Tan DX, Reiter RJ. On the free radical scavenging activities of melatonin's

metabolites, AFMK and AMK. J Pineal Res. ; ():-. doi: ./jpi..
.

Xiao J, Shimada M, Liu W, Hu D, Matsumori A. Anti-inflammatory effects of eplerenone

on viral myocarditis. Eur J Heart Fail. ; ():-. doi: ./eurjhf/hfp.
.

Tan X, Hu L, Luquette LJ, rd, Gao G, Liu Y, Qu H, Xi R, Lu ZJ, Park PJ, Elledge SJ.

Systematic identification of synergistic drug pairs targeting HIV. Nat Biotechnol. ;
():-. doi: ./nbt..
.

Kindrachuk J, Ork B, Hart BJ, Mazur S, Holbrook MR, Frieman MB, Traynor D, Johnson

RF, Dyall J, Kuhn JH, Olinger GG, Hensley LE, Jahrling PB. Antiviral potential of ERK/MAPK
and PIK/AKT/mTOR signaling modulation for Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
infection as identified by temporal kinome analysis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. ;
():-. doi: ./AAC.-.
.

Lewis EL, Harbour DA, Beringer JE, Grinsted J. Differential in vitro inhibition of feline

enteric coronavirus and feline infectious peritonitis virus by actinomycin D. J Gen Virol. ; 
( Pt ):-. doi: ./----.
.

Zhou WB, Ding Q, Chen L, Liu XA, Wang S. Toremifene is an effective and safe

alternative to tamoxifen in adjuvant endocrine therapy for breast cancer: results of four
randomized trials. Breast Cancer Res Treat. ; ():-. doi: ./s--.
.

Cong Y, Hart BJ, Gross R, Zhou H, Frieman M, Bollinger L, Wada J, Hensley LE,

Jahrling PB, Dyall J, Holbrook MR. MERS-CoV pathogenesis and antiviral efficacy of licensed
drugs in human monocyte-derived antigen-presenting cells. PLoS One. ; ():e.
doi: ./journal.pone..



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

.

Schwarz S, Wang K, Yu W, Sun B, Schwarz W. Emodin inhibits current through SARS-

associated coronavirus a protein. Antiviral Res. ; ():-. doi:
./j.antiviral....
.

Ho TY, Wu SL, Chen JC, Li CC, Hsiang CY. Emodin blocks the SARS coronavirus spike

protein and angiotensin-converting enzyme  interaction. Antiviral Res. ; ():-. doi:
./j.antiviral....
.

Fung TS, Liu DX. Activation of the c-Jun NH-terminal kinase pathway by coronavirus

infectious bronchitis virus promotes apoptosis independently of c-Jun. Cell Death Dis. ;
():. doi: ./s---.
.

Zeng X, Zhu S, Hou Y, Zhang P, Li L, Li J, Huang LF, Lewis SJ, Nussinov R, Cheng F.

Network-based prediction of drug-target interactions using an arbitrary-order proximity
embedded deep forest. Bioinformatics. . doi: ./bioinformatics/btaa.
.

Halder AK, Dutta P, Kundu M, Basu S, Nasipuri M. Review of computational methods for

virus-host protein interaction prediction: a case study on novel Ebola-human interactions. Brief
Funct Genomics. ; ():-. doi: ./bfgp/elx.
.

Bedi O, Dhawan V, Sharma PL, Kumar P. Pleiotropic effects of statins: new therapeutic

targets in drug design. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. ; ():-. doi:
./s---.
.

Li Q, Zhang YY, Chiu S, Hu Z, Lan KH, Cha H, Sodroski C, Zhang F, Hsu CS, Thomas

E, Liang TJ. Integrative functional genomics of hepatitis C virus infection identifies host
dependencies in complete viral replication cycle. PLoS Pathog. ; ():e. doi:
./journal.ppat..
.

Gebre M, Nomburg JL, Gewurz BE. CRISPR-Cas Genetic Analysis of Virus-Host

Interactions. Viruses. ; (). doi: ./v.
.

Kim JH, Lee JH, Koh ES, Park SW, Jang AS, Kim D, Park CS. Acute eosinophilic

pneumonia related to a mesalazine suppository. Asia Pac Allergy. ; ():-. doi:
./apallergy.....
.

Gupta A, Gulati S. Mesalamine induced eosinophilic pneumonia. Respir Med Case Rep.

; :-. doi: ./j.rmcr....
.

Sheahan TP, Sims AC, Leist SR, Schafer A, Won J, Brown AJ, Montgomery SA, Hogg

A, Babusis D, Clarke MO, Spahn JE, Bauer L, Sellers S, Porter D, Feng JY, Cihlar T, Jordan R,
Denison MR, Baric RS. Comparative therapeutic efficacy of remdesivir and combination
lopinavir, ritonavir, and interferon beta against MERS-CoV. Nat Commun. ; ():. doi:
./s---.


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

.

Kumar S, Stecher G, Li M, Knyaz C, Tamura K. MEGA X: Molecular Evolutionary

Genetics Analysis across Computing Platforms. Mol Biol Evol. ; ():-. doi:
./molbev/msy.
.

Kuleshov MV, Jones MR, Rouillard AD, Fernandez NF, Duan Q, Wang Z, Koplev S,

Jenkins SL, Jagodnik KM, Lachmann A, McDermott MG, Monteiro CD, Gundersen GW,
Ma'ayan A. Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis web server  update.
Nucleic Acids Research. ; (W):W-W. doi: ./nar/gkw.
.

Law V, Knox C, Djoumbou Y, Jewison T, Guo AC, Liu Y, Maciejewski A, Arndt D, Wilson

M, Neveu V, Tang A, Gabriel G, Ly C, Adamjee S, Dame ZT, Han B, Zhou Y, Wishart DS.
DrugBank .: shedding new light on drug metabolism. Nucleic Acids Res. ; (Database
issue):D-. doi: ./nar/gkt.
.

Yang H, Qin C, Li YH, Tao L, Zhou J, Yu CY, Xu F, Chen Z, Zhu F, Chen YZ.

Therapeutic target database update : enriched resource for bench to clinical drug target
and targeted pathway information. Nucleic Acids Res. ; (D):D-. doi:
./nar/gkv.
.

Gaulton A, Bellis LJ, Bento AP, Chambers J, Davies M, Hersey A, Light Y, McGlinchey

S, Michalovich D, Al-Lazikani B, Overington JP. ChEMBL: a large-scale bioactivity database for
drug discovery. Nucleic Acids Research. ; (D):D-D. doi: ./nar/gkr.
.

Liu TQ, Lin YM, Wen X, Jorissen RN, Gilson MK. BindingDB: a web-accessible

database of experimentally determined protein-ligand binding affinities. Nucleic Acids Research.
; :D-D. doi: ./nar/gkl.
.

Pawson AJ, Sharman JL, Benson HE, Faccenda E, Alexander SPH, Buneman OP,

Davenport AP, McGrath JC, Peters JA, Southan C, Spedding M, Yu WY, Harmar AJ, Nc I. The
IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY: an expert-driven knowledgebase of drug targets
and their ligands. Nucleic Acids Research. ; (D):D-D. doi:
./nar/gkt.
.

Apweiler R, Bairoch A, Wu CH, Barker WC, Boeckmann B, Ferro S, Gasteiger E, Huang

HZ, Lopez R, Magrane M, Martin MJ, Natale DA, O'Donovan C, Redaschi N, Yeh LSL. UniProt:
the Universal Protein knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Research. ; :D-D. doi:
./nar/gkh.
.

Coordinators NR. Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology

Information. Nucleic Acids Res. ; (D):D-. doi: ./nar/gkv.



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

.

Cheng F, Jia P, Wang Q, Lin CC, Li WH, Zhao Z. Studying tumorigenesis through

network evolution and somatic mutational perturbations in the cancer interactome. Mol Biol
Evol. ; ():-. doi: ./molbev/msu.
.

Cheng F, Liu C, Lin CC, Zhao J, Jia P, Li WH, Zhao Z. A Gene Gravity Model for the

Evolution of Cancer Genomes: A Study of , Cancer Genomes across  Cancer Types.
PLoS Comput Biol. ; ():e. doi: ./journal.pcbi..
.

Reghunathan R, Jayapal M, Hsu L-Y, Chng H-H, Tai D, Leung BP, Melendez AJ.

Expression profile of immune response genes in patients with Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome. BMC Immunology. ; ():. doi: ./---.
.

Josset L, Menachery VD, Gralinski LE, Agnihothram S, Sova P, Carter VS, Yount BL,

Graham RL, Baric RS, Katze MG. Cell host response to infection with novel human coronavirus
EMC predicts potential antivirals and important differences with SARS coronavirus. mBio. ;
():e-. doi: ./mBio.-.
.

Yuan S, Chu H, Chan JF-W, Ye Z-W, Wen L, Yan B, Lai P-M, Tee K-M, Huang J, Chen

D, Li C, Zhao X, Yang D, Chiu MC, Yip C, Poon VK-M, Chan CC-S, Sze K-H, Zhou J, Chan IHY, Kok K-H, To KK-W, Kao RY-T, Lau JY-N, Jin D-Y, Perlman S, Yuen K-Y. SREBP-dependent
lipidomic reprogramming as a broad-spectrum antiviral target. Nature Communications. ;
():. doi: ./s---x.
.

Sirota M, Dudley JT, Kim J, Chiang AP, Morgan AA, Sweet-Cordero A, Sage J, Butte AJ.

Discovery and preclinical validation of drug indications using compendia of public gene
expression data. Sci Transl Med. ; ():ra. doi: ./scitranslmed..



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

Table . Top drug candidates from network-based repurposing approach with
literature antiviral evidences.
Z-score DrugBank Drug Name
ID
-.
DB Irbesartan

Structure

Category
antihypertensive
N

NH
N N

Therapeutic effect on PubMed ID
virus
HBV, HDV
,
,


N

O

N

-.

DB

Toremifene

O

antineoplastic

EBOV, MERS-CoV,
SARS-CoV

,
,
,


antipruritic, antiinfective

HN

,


estrogen

ZEBOV-GP/HIV



anti-inflammatory

EBV



antimetabolite,
antineoplastic

SARS-CoV, MERSCoV

,
,


selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor

EBOV



immunosuppressants

ANDV, HCV

,
,
,


beta-blocker

EMCV



anti-inflammatory

EBV



antineoplastic

FECV



hormone

EBOV, RSV

,


N

Cl

-.

DB

Camphor

O

-.

DB

Equilin

O
H
H

-.

DB

Mesalazine

HO

O
H N

OH
OH

-.

DB

Mercaptopurine

S

H
N

N

-.

DB

N

N
H

H
N

Paroxetine

O
O
O

-.

DB

F

Sirolimus

H
O

O

O

OH
O

N
H
O

O

O

H

O

OH
O

OH

O

-.

DB

Carvedilol

O
OH

-.

DB

O

N
H

O

N
H

Colchicine

O

O

O
O
O

-.

DB

NH
O

Dactinomycin

O
O

N
O

N

H
N

O

O
H
N
O

N
H

O

O

N

NH

O

O

O

-.

DB

NH

O

O

O

HN

N

O

N

N
O

Melatonin

H
N
O

H

HN
O



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

-.

DB

Quinacrine

antimalarial, antibiotic

EV, EBOV

,
,


diuretic

viral myocarditis



anthraquinones

HSV-, HSV-, HBV,
SARS-CoV, CVB₄

anabolic steroid

HIV wasting

,
,
,
,



polyphenolic
phytoalexin

MERS-CoV



N

HN
O
N

Cl

-.

DB

Eplerenone

O
O
O

H

OH

O

H

-.

DB

Emodin

O

O

OH

HO
O

-.

DB

Oxymetholone

HO
H
HO

H

H

O

-.

DB

Resveratrol

OH
HO

OH

HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HDV, hepatitis delta virus; EBOV, Ebola viruses; ZEBOVGP, Zaire Ebola virus-glycoprotein; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ANDV,
Andes orthohantavirus; EMCV, encephalomyocarditis virus; FECV, feline enteric coronavirus; RSV,
respiratory syncytial virus; EV, enterovirus ; HSV- and -, Herpes simplex viruses; CVB₄,
Coxsackievirus B₄.



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

Figure Legends
Figure . Overall workflow of this study. Our network-based methodology combines
a systems pharmacology-based network medicine platform that quantifies the interplay
between the virus-host interactome and drug targets in the human PPI network. (A)
Human coronavirus (HCoV) associated host proteins were collected from literatures and
pooled to generate a pan-HCoV protein subnetwork. (B) Network proximity between
drug targets and HCoV-associated proteins was calculated to screen for candidate
repurposable drugs for HCoVs under the human protein interactome model. (C & D)
Gene set enrichment analysis was utilized to validate the network-based prediction. (E)
Top candidates were further prioritized for drug combinations using network-based
method captured by the ‘Complementary Exposure’ pattern: the targets of the drugs
both hit the HCoV-host subnetwork, but target separate neighborhoods in the human
interactome network. (F) Overall hypothesis of network-based methodology: (i) the
proteins that functionally associate with HCoVs are localized in the corresponding
subnetwork within the comprehensive human interactome network; and (ii) proteins that
serve as drug targets for a specific disease may also be suitable drug targets for
potential antiviral infection owing to common protein-protein interactions elucidated by
the human interactome.

Figure . Phylogenetic analysis of coronaviruses. (A) Phylogenetic tree of
coronavirus (CoV). Phylogenetic algorithm analyzed evolutionary conservation among
whole genomes of  coronaviruses. Red color highlights the recent emergent


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

coronavirus, -nCoV, originating in Wuhan, China. Numbers on the branches
indicate bootstrap support values. The scale shows the evolutionary distance computed
using the p-distance method. (B) Schematic plot for HCoV genomes. The genus and
host information of viruses was labeled on the left by different colors. Empty dark gray
boxes represent accessory open reading frames (ORFs). The D structures of SARSCoV nsp (PDB ID: NUR) (C), spike (PDB ID: ACK) (D) and nucleocapsid (PDB ID:
CJR) (E) shown were based on homology modeling. Genome information and
phylogenetic analysis results are provided in Supplementary Table S-.

Figure . Drug-target network analysis of the HCoV-host interactome. (A) A
subnetwork highlighting the HCoV-host interactome. Nodes represent three types of
HCoV-associated host proteins: targetgable (proteins can be targeted by approved
drugs or drugs under clinical trials), non-targetable (proteins don’t have any known
ligands), neighbors (protein-protein interaction partners). Edge colors indicate five types
of experimental evidences of the protein-protein interactions (see Methods). D: threedimensional structure. (B) KEGG human pathway and (C) gene ontology enrichment
analyses for the HCoV-associated proteins.

Figure . A discovered drug-HCoV network. (A) A subnetwork highlighting networkpredicted drug-HCoV associations connecting  drugs and HCoVs. From the ,
drugs evaluated,  ones achieved significant proximities between drug targets and
the HCoV-associated proteins in the human interactome network. Drugs are colored by


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

their first-level of the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system
code. (B) A heatmap highlighting network proximity values for SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV,
IBV, and MHV respectively. Color key denotes network proximity (Z-score) between
drug targets and the HCoV-associated proteins in the human interactome network. Pvalue was computed by permutation test.

Figure . A discovered drug-protein-HCoV network for  potential repurposable
drugs. (A) Network-predicted evidences and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
scores for  potential repurposable drugs for HCoVs. The overall connectivity of the
top drug candidates to the HCoV-associated proteins was examined. Most of these
drugs indirectly target HCoV-associated proteins via the human protein-protein
interaction networks. All the drug-target-HCoV-associated protein connections were
examined, and those proteins with at least  connections are shown. The box heights
for the proteins indicate the number of connections. GSEA scores for  drugs were not
available (NA) due to the lack of transcriptome profiles for the drugs. (B-E) Inferred
mechanism-of-action networks for four selected drugs: (B) toremifene (first generation
nonsteroidal selective estrogen receptor modulator), (C) irbesartan (an angiotensin
receptor blocker), (D) mercaptopurine (an antimetabolite antineoplastic agent with
immunosuppressant properties), and (E) melatonin (a biogenic amine for treating
circadian rhythm sleep disorders).



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the
author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC . International license .

Figure . Network-based rational design of drug combinations for HCoVs. (A) The
possible exposure mode of the HCoV-associated protein module to the pairwise drug
combinations. An effective drug combination will be captured by the ‘Complementary
Exposure’ pattern: the targets of the drugs both hit the HCoV-host subnetwork, but
target separate neighborhoods in the human interactome network. ZCA and ZCB denote
the network proximity (Z-score) between targets (Drugs A and B) and a specific HCoV.
SAB denotes separation score (see Methods) of targets between Drug A and Drug B. (BD) Inferred mechanism-of-action networks for three selected pairwise drug
combinations: (B) Sirolimus (a potent immunosuppressant with both antifungal and
antineoplastic properties) plus Dactinomycin (a RNA synthesis inhibitor for treatment of
various tumors), (C) Toremifene (first generation nonsteroidal selective estrogen
receptor modulator) plus Emodin (an experimental drug for the treatment of polycystic
kidney), and (D) Melatonin (a biogenic amine for treating circadian rhythm sleep
disorders) plus Mercaptopurine (an antimetabolite antineoplastic agent with
immunosuppressant properties).



Figure 

A

HCoV-associated host
protein subnetwork

HCoV-associated host proteins

B

Human interactome

C HCoV-induced transcriptome

Drug-target network

Drug-induced transcriptome

Targetable

d=

…

…
dn

Enrichment analysis

σR σR

+


d

F

D

Network-based drug repurposing

d

μR

z=

d − μR
σR

Drug-induced gene profile
HCoV-induced gene profile

E

Network-based prediction
of drug combinations

Figure 

A

B

C

D

ACE

NSP

E
N

S

Figure 
A

Binary
Connectivity

D
Complex

Targetable

Kinase-substrate

Non-targetable

Signaling
Literature

Neighbor

B

C

Figure 
A

The first-level of ATC code
Alimentary tract and metabolism
Antineoplastic and immunomodulating
Antiparasitic products
Blood and blood forming organs
Cardiovascular system
Genito-urinary system & sex hormones
Musculo-skeletal system
Nervous system
Respiratory system
Sensory organs
Various
Not available

Equilin

SARS-CoV
Camphor

Mesalazine
Quinacrine

Toremifene

Dactinomycin
Carvedilol
Irbesartan

Sirolimus

MHV

Pan-HCoV

IBV

Paroxetine

Melatonin

Colchicine

Oxymetholone

B

Mercaptopurine

MERS-CoV

Figure 
A

GSEA score

Drug

Drug target

HCoV-associated protein
SARS-CoV
MERS-CoV
IBV
MHV
Shared

NA

NA

NA
NA

NA

NA
NA
NA








B

C

D

E

HCoV-associated protein
Drug
Drug target
HCoV-associated protein
and drug target

Figure 

A

b. Complementary

ZCA < , ZCB < , SAB < 

ZCA < , ZCB < , SAB ≥ 

c. Single exposure

d. Non-exposure

ZCA < , ZCB ≥ , SAB ≥ 

ZCA ≥ , ZCB ≥ , SAB ≥ 

HCoV-associated protein (C)
Drug A target
Drug B target
ZC

-
.


B

a. Overlapping

B

ZC

A


.
-

=

=

SAB = .

ZC

-
.


C
B

ZC

A


.
-

=

=

SAB = .

ZC

-
.


D
B

ZC

A


.
-

=

=

SAB = .

