News
China seek for court's
approval to kill the over
20,000 coronavirus
patients to avoid further
spread of the virus
By Local Correspondent                 




I got the following message from a friend.
Transfer. My classmate's uncle and nephew, graduated
with a master's degree, and work in Shenzhen Hospital.
He is being transferred to study Wuhan pneumonia virus.
He just called me and told me to tell m ny friends: If you
have a runny nose and sputum when you have a cold, you
cannot be a new type of coronavirus pneumonia, because
coronavirus pneumonia is a dry cough without a runny nose.
This is the simplest way to identify.
Please tell your friends that if you know more about
medical knowledge, you will have more awareness of
identification and prevention.
Director Zhenxing informed that the Wuhan vinus is not
heat-resistant and will be killed in a temperature of 26-27
degrees. So drink plenty of hot water. Can tell relatives
and friends to drink hot water for prevention.
From a Chinese doctor. To prevent Wuhan virus, as long as
the human body maintains heat energy, eat more ginger
and exercise more, you will not be infected with the virus.
If you have a high fever, cover yourself with a quilt Drink
ginger soup to increase the body's heat energy. It can prevent
infection. No vaccination required. Eat more ginger, garlic,
hot chilies, and pepper. Eat less sweet and sour and bitter.
Don't drink too much ice water. Don't go to cold weather
areas.
When the sun is in the virus endemic area, the virus will
completely disappear.
Everyone can share and help one by one.
Dr. Khin Maung U.


















Pass it Please
Good news, W uhan's corona virus can
be cured by one bowl of freshly boiled
garlic water.
Old Chinese doctor has proven it's
efficacy. Many patients has also proven
this to be effective. Eight (8) cloves of
chopped garlics add seven (7)cups of
water and bring to boil., Eat and drink
the boiled garlic water, ovemight
improvement and healing. Glad to share         




Forwarded
HOMOEO MEDICINES FOR CORONA VIRUS DISEASE
Dear Friends,
There is lot of fear and anxiety among the people travelling abroad about the
news about CORONA VIRUS or WUHAN VIRUS.
Do not worry about it. There are excellent medicines in Homoeopathy to
prevent and also to cure. After studying the symptoms available through
media our Forum strongly advise the following Homoeo medicines to
prevent. We have 44 years of experience in handling various acute and
chronic diseases though Homoeopathy. We provide this advice to help the
needy people.
ARSENIC ALB 30 daily moming 4 pills and evening 4pills for 5 days
No medicine on the 6th day.
PHOSPHORUS 30 on 7th day moming 4 pills.
Daily use of the following Homeo Mother Tinctures also will help to prever
and cure the disease. Use it in the following way for 15 days.
1.0CIMUM SANCTUM Mother Tincture (extract of Krishna Tulasi ).
Drink morning 10 drops and evening 10 drops with 3 tea spoons of water.
2. TINOSPORA CORDIFOLIA Mother Tincture (extract of Amrita balli in
Kannada and Thippa theega in Telugu).
Drink afternoon 10 drops and night 10 drops with 3 tea spoons of water.
Precautions:
1. Take all the precautions about cleanliness and hygiene.
2. Do not consume junk food and non-veg food.
3. Avoid Direct physical contact with other persons. Use a nose mask.
4. Keep few Homoeo medicines and use whenever there is a need on the
advice of a Homoeopathic Doctor.
5. Kindly take medical help when there is a need. Do not neglect.
Our Forum wishes good health and happiness to all. With regards and best
wishes
PV Satyanarayana and all the Members of the Forum.
Dr. GV Chalapathi Memorial Homoeopathic Self Reliance Forum, (A
Voluntary Service Organisation), Opposite to Scientists Hostel No 2, D RDO
Township, CV Ram an Nagar, Bangalore - 560093. Mobile No. 93430 94787                 
AS RECEIVED: The new NCP coronavirus may not show sign of infection for
many days. how can one know if he/she is infected. By the time they have fever
and/or cough and goes to the hospital, the lungs is usually 50 % Fibrosis and it's
too late!
Taiwan experts provide a simple self-check that we can do every morning:
Take a deep breath and hold your breath for more than 10 seconds. If you
complete it successfully without coughing, without discomfort, stuffiness or
tightness etc it proves there is no fibrosis in the lungs, basically indicating no
infection.
In critical times, please self-check every morning in an environment with clean
air!
SERIOUS EXCELLENT ADVICE by Japanese doctors treating COVID-19 cases.
Everyone should ensure your mouth & throat is moist, never DRY. Take a few
sips of water every 15 mins at least. WHY? Even if the virus gets into your
mouth drinking water or other liquids will WASH them down through your
oesophagus and into the stomach. Once there in tummy your stomach ACID
will kill all the virus. If you don't drink enough water more regularly...the virus
can enter your windpipes and into the LUNGS. That's very dangerous.
Pls send and share with family, friends and everyone about this ! Take care
Everyone n may the world recovers from corona virus soon. May all be well n
happy                




As Forwarded
Most Urgent, very Serious, Important information
Ministry of health's emergency notification to the public that the
Coronavirus influenza outbreak this time is very very serious & fatal.
There's no cure once you are infected.
Its spreading from China to various countries
Prevention method is to keep your throat moist, do not let your throat
dry up. Thus do not hold your thirst because once your membrane in your
throat is dried, the virus will invade into your body within 10 mins.
Drink 50-80cc wam water, 30-50cc for kids, according to age. Everytime
u feel your throat is dry, do not wait, keep water in hand. Do not drink
plenty at one time as it doesn't help, instead continue to keep throat
moist.
Till end of March 2020, do not go to crowded places, wear mask as
needed especially in train or public transportation Avoid fried or spicy
food and load up vitamin C.
The symptoms/description are
1.repeated high fever
2.prolonged coughing after fever
3.Children are prone
4.A dults usually feel uneasy. headache and mainly respiratory related
5: highly contagious
Pls share if you care for human life!
                                
RASAM - Antidote For Wuhan Virus
By Manidar Nadeson, holistic healer
Many years ago when Malaysia was
hit by the Nipah virus, malaysian
indians were not affected. The reason
most of them consumed RASAM a
tamilan soup that is made from mix
of herbs.
If rasam is with a mild temperature
the body will react to heal any kind of
viruses. It is encourage to drink with
some hot rice for better effects.
It was put to trial during the SARS
epidemic and the results are
amazing.
Prevention is better than cure start
today for tomorrow, the Rasam".
Avoid consuming meat that is not
properly cooked.
"Rasam" the best way forward to
cure Wuhan viruses.                        
                                
                        
Forwarded
Unicef
Corona virus is large in size where the cell diameter is 400-500 micro and for
this reason any mask prevents its entry
The virus does not settle in the air but is grounded, so it is not transmitted by
air.
Coronavirus when it falls on a metal surface, it will live 12 hours, so washing
hands with soap and water well enough.
Corona virus when it falls on the fabric remains 9 hours, so washing clothes or
being exposed to the sun for two hours meets the purpose of killing it
The virus lives on the hands for 10 minutes. so putting an alcohol sterilizer in
the pocket meets the purpose of prevention.
If the virus is exposed to a temperature of 26-27° C. it will be killed, as it does
not live in hot regions. Also drinking hot water and sun exposure will do the
trick
And staying away from ice cream and eating cold is important.
Gargle with warm and salt water kills the tonsils gems and prevents them
from leaking into the lungs.
Adherence to these instructions fulfills the purpose of preventing viruses.
UNICEF        








Someone just said that a confirmed case of corona virus has been found in
the #ShaheenBaghProtest site. Please alert everyone and advise journalists
to avoid going there. It is a dangerous epidemic. Issued in the interest of
abundant precaution.




China seek for court's
approval to kill the over
20,000 coronavirus
patients to avoid further
spread of the virus
By Local Correspondent




Hello, everyone in Bangalore kindly request you not to come out of your
house after 10 pm tonight till tomorrow 5 am.
medicine in the air in order to kill the COVID-19!!
Share this information to all your friends relatives and your families only in
Bangalore.
As their will be spraying
Thank you!




COVID -19 IS CONFIRMED
AS AIRBORNE AND REMAIN
8 HRS IN AIR! SO EVERYONE
IS REQUIRED TO WEAR
MASK EVERYWHERE!




No more corona virus deaths. God Bless Israelites. Finally They Claim to Discover Vaccine For Corona Virus.