Forwarded
HOMOEO MEDICINES FOR CORONA VIRUS DISEASE
Dear Friends,
There is lot of fear and anxiety among the people travelling abroad about the
news about CORONA VIRUS or WUHAN VIRUS.
Do not worry about it. There are excellent medicines in Homoeopathy to
prevent and also to cure. After studying the symptoms available through
media our Forum strongly advise the following Homoeo medicines to
prevent. We have 44 years of experience in handling various acute and
chronic diseases though Homoeopathy. We provide this advice to help the
needy people.
ARSENIC ALB 30 daily moming 4 pills and evening 4pills for 5 days
No medicine on the 6th day.
PHOSPHORUS 30 on 7th day moming 4 pills.
Daily use of the following Homeo Mother Tinctures also will help to prever
and cure the disease. Use it in the following way for 15 days.
1.0CIMUM SANCTUM Mother Tincture (extract of Krishna Tulasi ).
Drink morning 10 drops and evening 10 drops with 3 tea spoons of water.
2. TINOSPORA CORDIFOLIA Mother Tincture (extract of Amrita balli in
Kannada and Thippa theega in Telugu).
Drink afternoon 10 drops and night 10 drops with 3 tea spoons of water.
Precautions:
1. Take all the precautions about cleanliness and hygiene.
2. Do not consume junk food and non-veg food.
3. Avoid Direct physical contact with other persons. Use a nose mask.
4. Keep few Homoeo medicines and use whenever there is a need on the
advice of a Homoeopathic Doctor.
5. Kindly take medical help when there is a need. Do not neglect.
Our Forum wishes good health and happiness to all. With regards and best
wishes
PV Satyanarayana and all the Members of the Forum.
Dr. GV Chalapathi Memorial Homoeopathic Self Reliance Forum, (A
Voluntary Service Organisation), Opposite to Scientists Hostel No 2, D RDO
Township, CV Ram an Nagar, Bangalore - 560093. Mobile No. 93430 94787                 
AS RECEIVED: The new NCP coronavirus may not show sign of infection for
many days. how can one know if he/she is infected. By the time they have fever
and/or cough and goes to the hospital, the lungs is usually 50 % Fibrosis and it's
too late!
Taiwan experts provide a simple self-check that we can do every morning:
Take a deep breath and hold your breath for more than 10 seconds. If you
complete it successfully without coughing, without discomfort, stuffiness or
tightness etc it proves there is no fibrosis in the lungs, basically indicating no
infection.
In critical times, please self-check every morning in an environment with clean
air!
SERIOUS EXCELLENT ADVICE by Japanese doctors treating COVID-19 cases.
Everyone should ensure your mouth & throat is moist, never DRY. Take a few
sips of water every 15 mins at least. WHY? Even if the virus gets into your
mouth drinking water or other liquids will WASH them down through your
oesophagus and into the stomach. Once there in tummy your stomach ACID
will kill all the virus. If you don't drink enough water more regularly...the virus
can enter your windpipes and into the LUNGS. That's very dangerous.
Pls send and share with family, friends and everyone about this ! Take care
Everyone n may the world recovers from corona virus soon. May all be well n
happy                
