Received:  February 

|

Accepted:  February 

DOI: ./jmv.

SHORT COMMUNICATION

Genomic variance of the ‐nCoV coronavirus
Carmine Ceraolo | Federico M. Giorgi
Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
Correspondence
Federico M. Giorgi, Department of Pharmacy
and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Via
Selmi ,  Bologna, Italy.
Email: federico.giorgi@unibo.it
Funding information
Ministero dellʼIstruzione, dellʼUniversità e
della Ricerca, Grant/Award Number:
Montalcini 

Abstract
There is a rising global concern for the recently emerged novel coronavirus (‐
nCoV). Full genomic sequences have been released by the worldwide scientific
community in the last few weeks to understand the evolutionary origin and molecular
characteristics of this virus. Taking advantage of all the genomic information currently
available, we constructed a phylogenetic tree including also representatives of other
coronaviridae, such as Bat coronavirus (BCoV) and severe acute respiratory
syndrome. We confirm high sequence similarity (>%) between all sequenced ‐
nCoVs genomes available, with the closest BCoV sequence sharing .% sequence
identity, confirming the notion of a zoonotic origin of ‐nCoV. Despite the low
heterogeneity of the ‐nCoV genomes, we could identify at least two hypervariable genomic hotspots, one of which is responsible for a Serine/Leucine variation in
the viral ORF‐encoded protein. Finally, we perform a full proteomic comparison with
other coronaviridae, identifying key aminoacidic differences to be considered for
antiviral strategies deriving from previous anti‐coronavirus approaches.
KEYWORDS

biostatistics & bioinformatics, CLUSTAL analysis, coronavirus, data visualization, virus
classification

 | INTRODUCTION

No vaccine for ‐nCoV has been publicly released, but a
World effort has arisen toward the characterization of the mole-

Coronaviridae (CoVs) are the largest known single‐stranded RNA

cular determinants and evolutionary features of this novel virus. An

viruses. They have been categorized in three groups, based on

initial comparison of  genomic sequences from ‐nCoV

phylogenetic analyses and antigenic criteria, specifically: (a) alpha‐

specimens has reported a low heterogeneity of this viruses with

CoVs, responsible for gastrointestinal disorders in human, dogs, pigs,

intersample sequence identity above .%. There are currently

and cats; (b) beta‐CoVs, including the Bat coronavirus (BCoV), the

 ‐nCoV complete genome sequences from the Global In-

human severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) virus and the

itiative for Sharing all Influenza Data (Gisaid) and from GenBank,

Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (MERS) virus; (c) gamma‐CoVs,

plus two partial sequences obtained by the Spallanzani hospital in

which infect avian species.

Rome, Italy (also from Gisaid).

Very recently, a novel beta‐CoVs coronavirus (‐nCoV) origi-

In this short report, we set out to characterize the hetero-

nating from the province of Wuhan, China, has been causally linked to

geneity of all ‐nCoV genomes and proteomes available at

severe respiratory infections in humans. At the time of writing,  

the moment of the study, comparing them to other re-

cases of ‐nCoV‐related pneumonia cases have been reported in

presentative coronaviridae, specifically SARS, MERS, and BCoV.

China, plus  cases from  other countries. There are currently 

We will generate phylogenetic trees of the ‐nCoV cases and

deaths linked to this pathogen (source: World Health Organization re-

apply entropy‐based analyses of position‐wise variance and

port,  February ). Phylogenetic relationships between Bat and

categorical principal component analysis (CATPCA) as an alter-

Human coronaviridae have been discovered for SARS and more recently

native method to estimate the sequence distance between all





also for ‐nCoV, suggesting events of inter‐species transmissions.


|

©  Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

analyzed viruses.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jmv

J Med Virol. ;:–.

CERAOLO

AND

|

GIORGI

 | METHODS



with a Tamura‐Nei Maximum Likelihood estimation with 
bootstraps for model robustness estimation.

All genomic sequences were collected on  February  from
GenBank or Gisaid.

The results are shown in Figure  as a phylogenetic tree representation. All the human ‐nCoV appear very similar to

MSA was performed using MUSCLE v...

each other, despite the different locations of sampling. Bat cor-

MSA visualization was generated via Jalview v ...

onaviridae appears to be the closet homologs. Two specific

Phylogenetic model generation and tree visualization were done

specimens gathered in  and  in China from the bat

using MEGAX v .., using the Maximum Likelihood method and

species Rhinolophus affinis and Rhinolophus sinicus appear to be

Tamura‐Nei model. The tree structure was validated by running the

located between the BCoV and the human ‐nCoV groups,

analysis on  bootstrapped input datasets.

supporting the notion of a zoonotic transfer from bats to hu-

CATPCA was performed on R version .. using the package


FactoMineR.

Specifically, an MSA FASTA file from MUSCLE is loaded in

R and converted into a categorical matrix, with genomes as rows and

mans.  Human SARS sequences group with BCoV sequences more
distantly related to ‐nCoV genomes. Finally, MERS genomes
are the most genetically distinct amongst the other sequences.

nucleotide coordinates as columns. Factors are defined as A, C, G, T, N,

A purely topological representation of a bootstrapped Maximum

or—(gap), as described in results. Then, the FactoMineR multiple corre-

Likelihood tree (Figure S) shows that ‐nCoV sequences are

spondence analysis algorithms is run with default parameters and custom

highly similar to each other, with poor support to the existence of

R functions are used to plot the component values for each genome.

distinct subgroups.

Pairwise protein identity and coverage were calculated using
BLAST protein v.. with BLOSUM matrix and default para-

The global multiple sequence alignment (MSA) is available as
Supporting Information File S.

meters. Nucleotide sequence identity and coverage were calculated
using BLAST nucleotide v...
Prediction of structural protein disorder was performed using
GLOBPLOT, an implementation of the Russell/Linding algorithm.

. | Genomic divergence from other
beta‐coronaviridae
Given the high homogeneity between ‐nCoV genomes, we de-

 | RESULTS

veloped a novel method to classify genomic sequences, based on
CATPCA. Briefly, this analysis finds the eigenvectors describing the

. | Phylogenetic analysis

highest variance within a categorical dataset, like ours. Our dataset
derived from the MUSCLE MSA of  genomes and generated

We collected  full genomic ‐nCoV sequences from the Gisaid

  positions: the categories in each coordinate could be A

database (Table S), plus the GenBank‐deposited sequence from the

(Adenine), C (Cytosine), G (Guanine; T [Thymine], although being an

Wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus isolate Wuhan‐Hu‐

single strand RNA virus, it would be more appropriate to use U

(NC_.) and two partial sequences from Italian isolates

[Uracil]), N (Nucleotide, uncertain location: very rare in this dataset,

(EPI_ISL_ and EPI_ISL_). To compare ‐nCoVs with

and accounting for only nine positions, or .% of all the data).

closely related viral species, we obtained six sequences from distinct

Our analysis shows similar results for phylogenetic tree re-

human SARS genomes from GenBank (the reference NC_., plus

presentations. In Figure A, we show the catPCA of the first com-

the genomes AY., GU., DQ., AY.,

ponents for all analyzed genomes. The MERS/non‐MERS grouping

and AY.). We also obtained six BCoV genomic sequences

accounts for the largest variance, while SARS and SARS‐like BCoVs

(DQ., DQ., JX., KJ., MG.,

cluster together. While ‐nCoV constitute a tightly similar clus-

EPI_ISL_). Finally, as more distantly related beta‐CoVs we ana-

ter, the two bat virus sequences MG. and EPI_ISL_

lyzed also MERS genomes from GenBank entries JX. and

appear to be linking the human ‐nCoV to the Bat coronaviridae.
A catPCA analysis on the sole ‐nCoV sequences highlights

KT..
Similarly to a previous report with  virus specimens, we detected

some internal variability (Figure B), with two likely outliers identi-

very high conservation between the  analyzed ‐nCoV genomes,

fied in the genome EPI_ISL_ (collected in Germany) and

with sequence identity above %. We found a bat CoV genome (Gisaid

EPI_ISL_ (collected in Shenzhen, China).

EPI_ISL_) with .% sequence identity (and query coverage
above %) to the ‐nCoV reference sequence (NC_.),
while the previously reported closest bat CoV (bat‐SL‐CoVZC) has a


sequence similarity of %.

The reference human SARS genome

. | Genomic variance estimation within
‐nCoV genomes

(NC_.) appears more distant from the reference ‐nCoV,
with sequence identity of .% and query coverage of %.

Although the variability within the ‐nCoV genomes is very low,

We aligned all the  coronavirus sequences using MUSCLE and

we set out to discover possible hotspots of hypervariability within the

inferred the evolutionary relationships between these sequences

viral population. We analyzed the approximately   nt of multiple



|

CERAOLO

AND

GIORGI

F I G U R E  Phylogenetic tree of all the ‐nCov sequences available at ‐Feb‐ (branches shown in blue), plus six Bat coronavirus
sequences (default black, as they are split in multiple taxa), six human SARS (green) and two MERS (orange). The percentage of bootstraps
supporting each branch is reported. Branches corresponding to partitions reproduced in less than % bootstrap replicates are collapsed.
MERS, Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome; SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome

CERAOLO

AND

|

GIORGI



F I G U R E  Categorical principal component analysis of the projected variance in the entire coronaviridae genome dataset considered in this
study (A) and in the ‐nCoV subset only (B). Human ‐nCoV are shown as blue circles, other genomes as grey diamonds

genome alignments performed on the  full ‐nCoV genomes.

 amino acid stretch in the protein entry P, with a nonsignificant

Our analysis shows that these viruses have largely the same genomic

E‐value of .. We, therefore, employed de novo methods to infer the

arrangement as the SARS species. A large gene encoding for a

structural features of ORF. One important effect we could detect is a

polyprotein (ORFab) at the ′ end of the genome is followed by four

significant effect of Serine in ORF‐S in inducing structural disorder in

major structural protein‐coding genes: S = Spike protein, E = Envelope

the protein C‐terminal portion, which is not predicted to be present in

protein, M = Membrane protein, and N = Nucleocapsid protein. There

the ORF‐L (Figure B), using the Russell/Linding algorithm. More-

are also at least six other accessory open reading frames (ORFs)

over, it did not escape our attention that the ORF‐S could theoretically

(Figure A).

generate a novel phosphorylation target for the mammalian host

For each position of the multialigned  ‐nCoV, we calcu-

Serine/Threonine kinases of the host organism. So, we searched for

lated Shannon Entropy as a measure of the position variability.

ORF homologous substrates in the Mammalia NCBI nr protein data-

Apart from the ′ and ′ ends, likely nonprotein coding and less

base, but could not find matches within the E‐value threshold of .

homogeneous, we identified two hotspots of hypervariability at
positions  and  (Figure B,C).
Position  witnesses the presence of either T (U) or C, and it
falls within the polyprotein gene. It causes a synonymous variation in

. | Protein conservation within ‐nCoV and
between other beta‐coronaviridae

the nucleotide triplet encoding for Serine  (amino acid coordinates
based on the reference genome NC_.), so it is likely not to

We performed a cross‐species analysis for all proteins encoded by

introduce phenotypical differences between the different strains.

the ‐nCoV and its relatives. We, therefore, analyzed the protein

On the other hand, position  falls within ORF and is char-

sequences encoded by all ORFs in these genomes

acterized by the presence of either a C or a U. This causes a Ser/Leu
change in amino acid (aa) , which can affect the conformation of the
peptide, given that Serine is a polar amino acid, and Leucine is nonpolar.
Aa appears to be nonconserved also across other coronaviridae
(Figure A, black arrow).

• Wuhan NC_. (GenBank reference genome for ‐
nCoV)
• BCoV bat‐SL‐CoVZXC MG. (Bat virus similar to ‐
nCoV)

We analyzed the alternative isoforms of ‐nCoV ORF‐aa
alternative isoforms, dubbed ORF‐L (Leucine) and ORF‐S (Serine).
Unfortunately, no crystal structures of close homologs to the ORF

• Bat SARS coronavirus HKU‐ DQ. (Bat virus more
distantly related to ‐nCoV)
• SARS NC_. (GenBank reference genome for SARS)

protein are available for a reliable homology modeling to measure the
structural impact of this amino acid substitution. The closest D model


to ‐nCoV ORF available in Protein Data Bank

is a short

Our analysis shows a close homology for all proteins with Bat
sequence MG. (>%), and more distant with the other Bat



|

CERAOLO

AND

GIORGI

F I G U R E  Variability within  ‐nCoV full genomic sequences. A, location of major structural protein‐encoding genes (red
boxes; S = Spike protein, E = Envelope protein, M = Membrane protein, N = Nucleocapsid protein) and accessory protein ORFs (blue
boxes) on the meta‐genomic sequence derived from the MSA of all genomes. B, Shannon entropy values across genomic locations. The
two coordinates with the highest entropy (excluding the ′ and ′ highly variable UnTranslated regions) are indicated. C, Zoom‐in of
the MSA describing the two most variable locations in the core genome, in the ORFab (left) and in ORF (right). MSA, multiple
sequence alignment

sequence and SARS reference. Query (‐nCoV) coverage was

please refer also to Figure C and Figures S and S. As

always above .%. Generally, we could observe high conservation

previously observed, the N protein in ‐nCoV differs from the

for structural proteins E, M, and A across the beta‐coronavirus

SARS ortholog in the structurally relevant amino acids  and .

family, while accessory proteins (especially ORF) seem to have
much stricter evolutionary constraints (Table ).
On average, nCoV shares .% of protein sequences with Bat

 | D IS C U S S I O N

virus MG., .% with Bat virus DQ.%, and .%
with the SARS proteome.

Our results highlight a high level of conservation within ‐

For further visual confirmation, via MSA, of the conservation

nCoV genomes sequenced so far, and a clear origin from other

between SARS and ‐nCoV, especially in structural proteins,

beta‐CoVs, specifically BCoVs, SARS and MERS. Our analysis

CERAOLO

AND

|

GIORGI



F I G U R E  A, MSA of the coronavirus proteins encoded by ORF in representative sequences for the ‐nCoV (Wuhan), BCoVs (Bat
SARS‐like and Bat SARS) and SARS viruses. B, Alignment of ORF‐L and ORF‐S, two isoforms varying at amino acid position  (indicated by a
red dot). The diagram shows in larger blue the Globplot‐predicted intrinsically disordered regions in the two isoforms. C, MSA of the
coronavirus Nucleocapside proteins. MSA, multiple sequence alignment

confirms previous results highlighting the BCoV as a likely evo-

potential implications in epitope definition and possible repurposing

lutionary link between the SARS viruses and the current epidemic

of anti‐SARS drugs and vaccines.

‐nCoV.  We could confirm this result both with standard

Our analysis found low variability (>% sequence identity)

phylogenetic analysis and a newly developed visualization

within the  ‐nCoV genomes available at the time of writing,

method for genomic distances, based on CATPCA.

with only two core positions of high variability, one a silent variant in

The similarity between ‐nCoV and the closest Bat relative is

the ORFab locus, and the other as an amino acid polymorphism in

very high: all proteins in the coronavirus proteome (with the

ORF. The mutation in ORF resulting in one of its two variants,

exception of ORF) have identities of above %, with full con-

ORF‐L and ORF‐S, is predicted to be affecting the structural dis-

servation of the genome length (~ kb). We could report also the

order of the protein. Specifically, the amino acidic region aa‐aa

specific amino acids that changed between SARS and nCoV, with

is more likely to be disordered in the ORF‐S isoform.

|



CERAOLO

T A B L E  Percentage identity between the human reference nCoV
proteins and other coronavirus representatives
Gene

Bat
MG.

Bat
DQ.

SARS
NC_.

ORFab (polyprotein)

.%

.%

.%

S (Spike)

.%

.%

.%

Orfa

.%

.%

.%

E (Envelope)

%

.%

.%

M (Membrane)

.%

.%

.%

ORF

.%

.%

.%

ORFa

.%

.%

.%

ORFb

.%

.%

.%

ORF

.%

.%

.%

N (Nucleocapsid)

.%

.%

.%

ORF

.%

.%

.%

In conclusion, our analysis confirms low variability within the
new epidemic virus ‐nCoV sequenced specimens, while
highlighting at least two nucleotide positions of higher variability
within protein‐coding regions, and specific amino acid divergences
compared to BCoVs and SARS. These findings shed a cautiously
optimistic light on the possibility of finding effective treatment for
this novel coronavirus, starting from already existing anti‐beta‐
coronaviridae compounds, which will be dealing with a relatively
homogenous viral population.
A C K N O W L E D GM E N T S
We would like to thank the Italian Ministry of University and Research
for funding. Also, we would like to acknowledge the fruitful discussions
with our colleagues Daniele Mercatelli, Simone Di Giacomo and Giorgio
Milazzo. Also, a big acknowledgment to Eleonora Fornasari for help with
graphics.
OR CID
Federico M. Giorgi

http://orcid.org/---

REFERENC ES
. Cui J, Li F, Shi Z‐L. Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nat
Rev Microbiol. ;():‐. https://doi.org/./s‐‐
‐
. Schoeman D, Fielding BC. Coronavirus envelope protein: current knowledge. Virol J. ;():. https://doi.org/./s‐‐‐
. Hu B, Ge X, Wang L‐F, Shi Z. Bat origin of human coronaviruses. Virol
J. ;():. https://doi.org/./s‐‐‐
. Benvenuto D, Giovannetti M, Ciccozzi A, Spoto S, Angeletti S,
Ciccozzi M. The ‐new coronavirus epidemic: evidence for virus
evolution. J Med Virol. . https://doi.org/./jmv.
. Lu H, Stratton CW, Tang Y. Outbreak of pneumonia of unknown
etiology in Wuhan China: the mystery and the miracle. J Med Virol.
. https://doi.org/./jmv.

AND

GIORGI

. Lu R, Zhao X, LI J, et al. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of
 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor
binding. The Lancet. :S. https://doi.org/.
/S‐()‐
. Shu Y, McCauley J. GISAID: global initiative on sharing all influenza data—from vision to reality. Euro Surveill. Mar. ;():
‐. https://doi.org/./‐.ES....
. Sayers EW, Cavanaugh M, Clark K, Ostell J, Pruitt KD, Karsch‐
Mizrachi I. GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res. ;(D):D‐D.
https://doi.org/./nar/gky
. Edgar RC. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. ;():‐. https://doi.org/
./nar/gkh
. Waterhouse AM, Procter JB, Martin DMA, Clamp M, Barton GJ.
Jalview Version —a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis
workbench. Bioinformatics. ;():‐. https://doi.org/.
/bioinformatics/btp
. Kumar S, Stecher G, Li M, Knyaz C, Tamura K. MEGA X: molecular evolutionary genetics analysis across computing platforms. Mol Biol Evol. ;
():‐. https://doi.org/./molbev/msy
. Tamura K, Nei M. Estimation of the number of nucleotide substitutions in
the control region of mitochondrial DNA in humans and chimpanzees.
Mol Biol Evol. ;():‐. https://doi.org/./oxfordjournals.
molbev.a
. Felsenstein J. Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach using the
bootstrap. Evolution. ;():‐. https://doi.org/./j.
‐..tb.x
. Le S, Joss J, Husson F. FactoMineR: an R package for multivariate
analysis. J Stat Softw. ;():‐.
. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ. Basic local
alignment search tool. J Mol Biol. ;():‐. https://doi.
org/./S‐()‐
. Linding R. GlobPlot: exploring protein sequences for globularity and
disorder. Nucleic Acids Res. ;():‐. https://doi.org/
./nar/gkg
. Narayanan K, Huang C, Makino S. SARS coronavirus accessory proteins.
Virus Res. ;():‐. https://doi.org/./j.virusres..
.
. Manaresi E, Conti I, Bua G, Bonvicini F, Gallinella G. A Parvovirus B
synthetic genome: sequence features and functional competence.
Virology. ;:‐. https://doi.org/./j.virol...
. Burley SK, Berman HM, Kleywegt GJ, Markley JL, Nakamura H,
Velankar S. Protein Data Bank (PDB): The Single Global Macromolecular Structure Archive. In: Wlodawer A, Dauter Z,
Jaskolski M, eds. Protein Crystallography. . New York, NY:
Springer New York; :‐.
. Anand K. Coronavirus main proteinase (CLpro) structure: basis for
design of anti‐SARS drugs. Science. ;():‐.
https://doi.org/./science.

SUPPO RTING IN F ORMATION
Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section.

How to cite this article: Ceraolo C, Giorgi FM. Genomic
variance of the ‐nCoV coronavirus. J Med Virol. ;:
–. https://doi.org/./jmv.

