Perspectives

The art of medicine
Historical linkages: epidemic threat, economic risk, and xenophobia
Sanitary Conventions were adopted, codifying the first
agreements for the prevention of the international spread
of infectious diseases. These conventions aimed to maximise
protection from disease with minimum effects on trade
and travel. Plague, cholera, and yellow fever, became the
focus of massive international concern due to their threat to
continental Europe and the economic threats the diseases
posed to global trade.
The early International Sanitary Conventions did not police
the spread of these three diseases from Europe to other
countries or focus on any diseases endemic to Europe. The
threat of diseases emerging from colonial sites that could
disturb systems of trade and travel led to aggressive control
of these diseases in sites of epidemic outbreak and aggressive
scrutiny of those people deemed to be responsible for
disease spread. The importance of colonial trade from Asia
led to the rise of a particular scrutiny and bias against people
of Asian descent—especially Chinese migrants and Indian
Muslims travelling around the world. In the eyes of colonial
health officials and the drafters of the first International
Sanitary Conventions, the spread of cholera and plague was
an economic, epidemic, and political risk to the long-term
stability of the global economy.
The particular anxieties over the threat of plague being
spread by the free travel of colonised populations drove
the colonial administrators in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) to
prophesise the potential collapse of the tea industry—and by
extension their entire colony. Because trade with Europe was
so crucial to the colony, in the late 19th century the colonial
administrators endeavoured to sacrifice all trade with India
rather than risk the threat of plague arriving with migrant
workers from the subcontinent. In one letter between colonial
administrators, it was suggested, in a derogatory way, that if
even a single person from India or east Asia entered Ceylon

www.thelancet.com Published online March 27, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30737-6	

Published Online
March 27, 2020
https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(20)30737-6

Reuters/Lucas Jackson

As a historian and medical sociologist, I have been studying
the histories of international responses to epidemic events
and what they can tell us about the nature of power,
economics, and geopolitics. A historical understanding of
the international regulations for containing the spread of
infectious diseases reveals a particular focus on controls that
have protected North American and European interests.
In the past months, there have been xenophobic attacks
on people of Asian descent connected to coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) and precipitous losses in global stock
exchanges and risk of recession. Most reports have treated
these as separate phenomena: considering one to be a
cultural consequence of epidemic fears run rampant and the
other to be the impact of the pandemic on global trade. Yet if
one pauses to consider the history of the global management
of pandemic disease threats, epidemics and global commerce
have been inextricably related. Part of this history is the role
of xenophobic responses to infectious disease threats. The
xenophobia that has occurred in relation to the COVID-19
pandemic can be situated in a longer history that dates
back to 19th-century epidemics and the first international
conventions on controlling the spread of infectious diseases.
While quarantine, cordon sanitaire, and other social
distancing practices date back to 14th-century Europe and
earlier, by the 19th century the spread of epidemic diseases
emerged as a problem that required an international,
coordinated response. European colonial expansion brought
smallpox and other diseases to the Americas and Africa
from the time of Columbus to the 1800s. These epidemics
wrought widespread devastation for Indigenous peoples.
Simultaneously, Europeans encountered new diseases in the
tropics. Colonisation brought a particular encounter with
diseases capable of harming Europeans. The Napoleonic Wars
were global in nature and also revealed the vulnerability of
European powers to diseases emerging from their colonial
domains, and the capacity of these diseases to emerge in
Europe. By the end of the 18th century, however, the preexisting forms of ad-hoc and uncoordinated quarantine of
ships at port by European powers was being tested, especially
in the Mediterranean. Epidemics of plague and cholera that
would claim hundreds of thousands of lives in Europe—while
claiming far more in India and elsewhere—became a concern.
But quarantines were costly, and were also an effective tactic
for imposing trade tariffs and enacting trade wars under the
guise of public health. A new system was needed to better
manage the spread of infectious disease.
From 1851 to 1938, 14 conferences were held to
standardise international regulations for the establishment
of quarantine and the sanitary management of plague,
cholera, and yellow fever. In 1892, the first International

1

Perspectives

Further reading
Campbell L. Chinese in UK report
“shocking” levels of racism after
coronavirus outbreak.
The Guardian, Feb 9, 2020
Tavernise S, Oppel Jr RA. Spit on,
yelled at, attacked: ChineseAmericans fear for their safety.
The New York Times,
March 23, 2020
West Ridgeway J. Letter to the
Secretary of State for the
Colonies, The Right Honorable
Joseph Chamberlain M P from
Ceylon Governor
Joseph West Ridgeway.
Dec 7, 1898, 65, FO 83/1691,
British National Archives at Kew
Winslow C-EA. International
Organization for Health.
Jan 23, 1945, 2,
R6150/8A/42169/41755,
League of Nations Archive
Risse GB. Plague, fear, and politics
in San Francisco’s Chinatown.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 2012
Mohr JC. Plague and fire: battling
black death and the 1900 burning
of Honolulu’s Chinatown.
New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2006
Harrison M. Contagion:
how commerce has spread
disease. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 2013
Harrison M. Quarantine,
pilgrimage, and colonial trade:
India 1866–1900.
Indian Econ Soc Hist Rev 1992;
29: 117–44
White AIR. Global risks, divergent
pandemics: contrasting
responses to bubonic plague and
smallpox in 1901 Cape Town.
Soc Sci Hist 2018; 42: 135–58
King NB. Security, disease,
commerce: ideologies of
postcolonial global health.
Soc Stud Sci 2002; 32: 763–89
Hoffman SJ. The evolution,
etiology and eventualities of the
global health security regime.
Health Pol Plann 2010; 25: 510–22
Lakoff A. Two regimes of global
health. Humanity Int J Human
Rights Humanitarian Develop
2010; 1: 59–79
Taylor RC. The politics of securing
borders and the identities of
disease. In: Dingwall R,
Hoffman LM, Staniland K, eds.
Pandemics and emerging
infectious diseases. Oxford:
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
2013: 72–84

2	

without being exposed to sanitary surveillance “there would
have been great peril to the Colony for these Coolies being
free immediately on landing (in Ceylon) to spread over the
island would scatter the seeds of disease as they went”.
Such xenophobic sentiments were shared elsewhere.
The heightened scrutiny and bias against non-Europeans
who were blamed for spreading disease have historically
resulted in aggressive racist and xenophobic responses
carried out in the name of health controls. In 1901 in
Cape Town, South Africa, an epidemic of bubonic plague
resulted in the quarantine and forced removal of most of
the city’s black African population to a racially segregated
quarantine camp. This camp and practice of eviction can be
viewed as part of the blueprint for future forced removals
and a precursor to racially segregated South African
townships before and during Apartheid.
Similar scrutiny was a feature of the policing of the Hajj.
Under the International Sanitary Conventions from 1892 to
1938, Muslim pilgrims travelling from India were perceived
in Europe as a threat because of their potential to meet
and spread disease to European Muslims during the Hajj,
who would then return to Europe by passage through
the Suez Canal. Quarantines and controls were enacted
for Muslims pilgrims who travelled both from India to
Mecca and back to Europe after the pilgrimage. The disease
surveillance and sanitary system that governed the Hajj has
historically been one of the largest of its kind in the world.
Concerns about the economic risks of disease spread were
not limited to European empires, and neither were the
xenophobic practices associated with those concerns. The
USA has a history of anti-Chinese sentiment in response
to epidemics. Historian James Mohr has described how in
Honolulu, doctors, colonial administrators, and the general
US colonial population lamented the outbreak of bubonic
plague in 1900 because it prompted fears that the city would
become associated with Asia, where plague was then present.
As plague spread in Honolulu and countries around the
world closed their borders or quarantined all vessels arriving
from its port, the Honolulu city administrators embarked on
a full quarantine of the city’s Chinatown, allowing no one to
leave. These quarantines imposed considerable hardships on
those within, limiting employment, movement, and access
to supplies. The area of quarantine encompassed Chinese
and non-US properties immediately near the harbour,
but avoided buildings and businesses that were owned by
white Americans and immediately connected to sites of
quarantine. Ultimately, the public health authorities burned
contaminated buildings, but fires spread beyond their
control and consumed most of Chinatown in flames. Similar
anti-Chinese responses occurred in San Francisco during
the plague epidemic of 1900–04, when Chinese-specific
quarantines were enacted.
My own research suggests that the concern for the trading
relationships central to US economic growth were pivotal

to US Congress endorsing the creation of WHO. In a 1945
report accompanying the resolution that ultimately heralded
US support for WHO, it stated that: “Particularly in our
shrinking world, the spread of disease via airplane or other
swift transport across national boundaries gives rise to ever
present danger. Thus to protect ourselves that we must help
wipe out disease everywhere…The records of our export trade
show that countries with relatively high living standards buy
most of our goods. If the rest of the world continues in illhealth and abject poverty our own economy will suffer.”
In 1948, the UN and World Health Assembly transferred
responsibility for the International Sanitary Conventions to
WHO in its charter. The International Sanitary Conventions
were reformed and ultimately renamed under WHO to
the International Health Regulations in 1969, which
were revised to their current form in 2005. More recently,
nations have aligned infectious disease control policy
alongside concerns for national security.
In the current pandemic of COVID-19, we also see the
links between epidemic risk, xenophobic responses, and the
global economy. Verbal and physical attacks on people of
Asian descent and descriptions of the disease as “the Chinese
virus” are all connected in this long legacy of associating
epidemic disease threat and trade with the movement of
Asian peoples. We have seen huge sell-offs on Asian stock
markets and distinct drops in share prices in European and
US financial markets. What was once an initial economic
concern for global trade as it related to China has now had
effects on all scales of the economy from small businesses to
the Fortune 500 and potentially on a scale we have not seen
since the worst financial crises of the 20th century.
When we think about the framing of disease threats, we
must recognise that the history of international infectious
disease control has largely been shaped by a distinctly
European perspective, prioritising epidemic threats that
arose from colonial (or now post-colonial) sites that
threatened to spread disease and affect trade. COVID-19
is a serious and dangerous pandemic, but we must ask
ourselves who our responses are designed to protect
and who are they meant to vilify? In a pandemic, the
best responses are those that protect all members of the
population. A Eurocentric or US-centric view that excludes
or stereotypes others will do much more harm than good.
As the epicentre of the epidemic shifts for now to Europe
and the USA and as global responses intensify, we should
be prepared for more economic risk and confront racist or
xenophobic responses for what they are—bigoted opinions
with no basis in public health or facts.

Alexandre I R White
Center for Medical Humanities and Social Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University and Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205–2113, USA
alexandrewhite@jhu.edu

www.thelancet.com Published online March 27, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30737-6

