The

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

of

m e dic i n e

C or r e sp ondence

SARS-CoV- Infection among Travelers
Returning from Wuhan, China
To the Editor: As severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus  (SARS-CoV-) infections
(causing coronavirus disease  [Covid-])
spread globally, uncertainty surrounds estimates
of the true number of infected persons, which is

crucial to determining the severity of infection
and the incidence of mild or asymptomatic cases
and their possible transmission. Modeling estimates suggest that in Wuhan, China, the city with
the most Covid- cases, there are substantially

January , :  persons arrived
for boarding at an airport in Wuhan, China
 Febrile persons were denied
boarding
Same day:  boarded an evacuation flight
in Wuhan and arrived in Singapore
 Febrile persons (Patients  and )
were transferred to a hospital
on arrival in Singapore

 Tested positive for SARS-CoV-

Before February , ,  persons
reported symptoms and were
transferred to a hospital

 Tested negative for SARS-CoV-

Same day:  were transferred to a
government quarantine facility

February , :  of  persons
were tested for SARS-CoV- at the
government quarantine facility
 Asymptomatic person (Patient )
tested positive for SARS-CoV- and
 person had an indeterminate result;
both were transferred to a hospital
February , : all  persons at the
government quarantine facility were tested
for SARS-CoV- and had negative results

All isolated persons were released from
the government quarantine facility after
a -day quarantine period

Figure . Follow-up of  Persons who Boarded an Evacuation Flight from Wuhan, China, to Singapore on January ,
.
Of the  persons who had been transferred to a hospital before February , ,  returned to the government
quarantine facility and are included with the  persons who underwent testing at the facility on quarantine day 
(February , ). SARS-CoV- denotes severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus .

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March , . For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.



The

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

more cases than were officially reported, because
milder cases may not have been captured in
hospital-based surveillance., Data on travelers
returning from areas with cases of Covid-
could be useful in estimating its incidence.
We followed up on  persons who boarded
an evacuation flight from Wuhan to Singapore on
January , . Screening for body temperature
was conducted at check-in and before boarding,
and  febrile persons were prevented from boarding (Fig. ); no additional information regarding
the status of these  febrile persons was available. Surgical masks were provided to passengers
on board the plane. On arrival in Singapore, the
passengers underwent repeat screening for body
temperature (fever was defined as a body temperature ≥°C), and  persons (a woman  years
of age [Patient ] and a woman  years of age
[Patient ]) had a fever. The  febrile women
were transferred immediately to a hospital, and
they tested positive for SARS-CoV- (their clinical course is described in the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this letter
at NEJM.org).
The remaining  afebrile passengers (age
range,  to  years) were quarantined for  days
at a government quarantine facility, where they
were checked for symptoms and fever three times
daily. Six persons reported symptoms ( on quarantine day  and  on quarantine day ) and
were placed in isolation in a hospital and underwent polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) testing;
all  persons tested negative for SARS-CoV-.
On quarantine day , samples from  of the 
asymptomatic persons ( nasopharyngeal swab
samples and  nasal swab sample) were obtained
and tested by means of PCR. A -year-old boy (the
son of Patient ) tested positive for Covid- and
continued to have PCR-positive status for  weeks,
and a -year-old man had an inconclusive result
(positive for N gene and negative for ORFab gene).
On quarantine day , samples from all  quarantined asymptomatic persons ( nasopharyngeal
swab samples and  nasal swab samples [ of the
 persons who had been transferred to the hospital before February  had returned to the government quarantine facility]) were obtained and
tested; all tested negative. All persons who were
not isolated in the hospital were released from
quarantine on day , and all remained uninfected with Covid-. Understanding the impli-



of

m e dic i n e

cations of transmission of SARS-CoV- infection
from persons with asymptomatic or very mild
symptomatic cases of Covid- is vital for the
formulation of containment strategies.
Oon-Tek Ng, M.P.H.
Kalisvar Marimuthu, M.B., B.S.
Po-Ying Chia, M.B., B.S.
Vanessa Koh, Ph.D.
National Centre for Infectious Diseases
Singapore, Singapore
oon_tek_ng@ncid.sg
kalisvar_marimuthu@ncid.sg

Calvin J. Chiew, M.P.H.
Ministry of Health
Singapore, Singapore

Liang De Wang, M.Sc.
Barnaby E. Young, M.B., B.Chir.
Monica Chan, B.M., B.S.
Shawn Vasoo, M.B., B.S.
Li-Min Ling, M.B., B.S.
David C. Lye, M.B., B.S.
National Centre for Infectious Diseases
Singapore, Singapore

Kai-qian Kam, M.Med.(Ped.)
Koh-Cheng Thoon, M.Med.(Ped.)
KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital
Singapore, Singapore

Lalitha Kurupatham, M.P.H.
Zubaidah Said, M.P.H.
Ethan Goh, M.P.H.
Constance Low, M.P.H.
Soon-Kok Lim, M.P.H.
Pream Raj, M.P.H.
Olivia Oh, Ph.D.
Valerie T.J. Koh, M.P.H.
Cuiqin Poh, M.P.H.
Ministry of Health
Singapore, Singapore

Tze-Minn Mak, Ph.D.
Lin Cui, Ph.D.
National Centre for Infectious Diseases
Singapore, Singapore

Alex R. Cook, Ph.D.
Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health
Singapore, Singapore

Raymond T.P. Lin, M.B., B.S.
Yee-Sin Leo, M.P.H.
National Centre for Infectious Diseases
Singapore, Singapore
yee_sin_leo@ncid.sg

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March , . For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

Correspondence

Vernon J.M. Lee, Ph.D.
Ministry of Health
Singapore, Singapore
vernon_lee@moh.gov.sg
Drs. Ng, Marimuthu, Leo, and Lee contributed equally to the
study.
Supported by the following grants from the National Medical
Research Council, Ministry of Health, Singapore: Collaborative
Solutions Targeting Antimicrobial Resistance Threats in Health
Systems (CoSTAR-HS) (NMRC CGAugC), NMRC Clinician
Scientist Award (MOH-), and NMRC Clinician Scientist
Individual Research Grant (MOH-CIRGnov-).
Disclosure forms provided by the author are available with the
full text of this letter at NEJM.org.
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
reflect the views of the Ministry of Health or the National Medical Research Council.
This article was published on March , , at NEJM.org.

.	 World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus (-nCoV):​
situation report - . February  (https://www​.who​.int/​docs/​
default​-­source/​coronaviruse/​situation​-­reports/​​-­sitrep​-­​
-­ncov​.pdf?sfvrsn=cd_).
.	 Wu JT, Leung K, Leung GM. Nowcasting and forecasting the
potential domestic and international spread of the -nCoV
outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. Lancet ;​:​-.
.	 Imai N, Dorigatti I, Cori A, Riley S, Ferguson NM. Estimating
the potential total number of novel Coronavirus cases in Wuhan
City, China. London:​Imperial College London, January , 
(https://www​.imperial​.ac​.uk/​media/​imperial​-­college/​medicine/​
sph/​ide/​gida​-­fellowships/​​-­nCoV​-­outbreak​-­report​-­​-­​-­​
.pdf).
.	 Hoehl S, Rabenau H, Berger A, et al. Evidence of SARS-CoV-
infection in returning travelers from Wuhan, China. N Engl J
Med. DOI:​./NEJMc.
DOI: ./NEJMc
Correspondence Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society.

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March , . For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.



