The

NEW ENGLA ND JOURNAL

of

MEDICINE

Perspective
﻿

Facing Covid-19 in Italy — Ethics, Logistics,
and Therapeutics on the Epidemic’s Front Line
Lisa Rosenbaum, M.D.​​
Facing Covid-19 in Italy

A

few weeks ago, Dr. D., a middle-aged chief
of cardiology at one of the biggest hospitals
in northern Italy, developed a fever. Fearing
he might have Covid-19, he sought confirmatory
testing but was told there weren’t
enough tests available for those
who hadn’t had demonstrated exposure to an infected person. He
was therefore advised to stay home
until the fever resolved. He returned to work 6 days later, but
5 days after that, a mild fever recurred, and soon he developed a
cough. He again quarantined himself in the basement of his home
so as not to expose his family.
With half his hospital’s 1000
beds occupied by patients with
Covid-19, Dr. D., who finally received a positive test result on
March 10, knows he’s fortunate.
About 60 to 90 patients with
symptoms suggestive of Covid-19
were presenting to his hospital’s
emergency department daily. Noninvasive ventilation was attempted
in as many as possible, but the

rapidity of respiratory deterioration in the most severely affected
patients, including some young
ones, was striking and often unforeseeable. “You have no predictive bible to help you,” Dr. D. told
me. This uncertainty only heightened the agony of the impossible
decisions doctors were facing.
“We have to decide who can go
forward,” he said.
Dr. D. was one of three physicians I spoke with who’ve been
caring for patients in northern
Italy, which has borne the brunt
of the country’s thousands of
confirmed coronavirus infections
and, as of mid-March, more than
1000 deaths. Though the catastrophic nature of Lombardy’s outbreak has since been widely publicized,1 when we spoke, all three
requested anonymity, in accor-

dance with the guidance they’d
been given. Dr. L., a staff doctor
at a different hospital, had received
a hospital memo forbidding press
interviews so as to avoid causing
further public alarm. Yet, as he
emphasized, minimizing the gravity of the situation was having
lethal consequences. “The citizens
won’t accept the restrictions,” he
said, “unless you tell them the
truth.”
That truth is rather grim.
Though Italy’s health system is
highly regarded and has 3.2 hospital beds per 1000 people (as
compared with 2.8 in the United
States), it has been impossible to
meet the needs of so many critically ill patients simultaneously.
Elective surgeries have been cancelled, semielective procedures
postponed, and operating rooms
turned into makeshift ICUs. With
all beds occupied, corridors and
administrative areas are lined with
patients, some of them receiving
noninvasive ventilation.
How to treat these patients?

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org ﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March 28, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

1

Facing Covid-19 in Italy

PERS PE C T IV E

Beyond the ventilatory support
for the severe interstitial pneumonias that develop, therapy is
empirical, though lopinavir–ritonavir, chloroquine, and sometimes
high-dose steroids are all being
tried.
And how to care for patients
presenting with unrelated illnesses? Though hospitals are attempting to create Covid-19 units, it’s
been difficult to protect other patients from exposure. Dr. D. told
me, for instance, that at least five
patients who’d been admitted to
his hospital for myocardial infarction were presumed to have
been infected with Covid-19 while
hospitalized.
If protecting patients is difficult, so is protecting health care
workers, including nurses, respiratory therapists, and those tasked
to clean the rooms between patients. When we spoke, Dr. D. was
one of six physicians in his division to have suspected Covid-19
infection. Given testing lags and
the proportion of infected people
who remain asymptomatic, it’s
too soon to know the rate of infection among caregivers. And it
is precisely these circumstances
that make infection control so
difficult. “The infection is everywhere in the hospital,” Dr. D.
told me. “Although you wear protective gear and do the best you
can, you cannot control it.”
The challenge, he suggested,
had less to do with caring for patients with Covid-19–related critical illness, in whose rooms clinicians are shielded in protective
gear, than with caregivers’ many
other daily activities: touching
computers, riding elevators, seeing
outpatients, eating lunch. Mandatory quarantine of infected workers, even those with mild illness,
seems critical to infection control. But not all caregivers are
equally vulnerable to severe illness,
2

and workforce shortages will have
to be managed somehow. One junior attending, Dr. S., told me that
at his hospital young physicians
were on the front lines, signing
up for extra shifts and working
outside their specialties. Nevertheless, he describes an eagerness
among his senior colleagues to
step up. “You can see the fear in
their eyes,” he said, “but they want
to help.”
Whatever fears these caregivers may harbor about their own
health, what they seemed to find
far more unbearable was watching people die because resource
constraints limited the availability
of ventilatory support. So aversive
was this rationing that they hesitated to describe how these decisions were being made. Dr. S.
offered a hypothetical scenario
involving two patients with respiratory failure, one 65 and the
other 85 with coexisting conditions. With only one ventilator,
you intubate the 65-year-old. Dr. D.
told me his hospital was also considering, in addition to the number of comorbidities, the severity
of respiratory failure and probability of surviving prolonged intubation, aiming to dedicate its limited resources to those who both
stand to benefit most and have
the highest chance of surviving.
But though approaches vary
even within a single hospital, I
sensed that age was often given
the most weight. I heard one story,
for instance, about an 80-year-old
who was “perfect physically” until
he developed Covid-19–related respiratory failure. He died because
mechanical ventilation could not
be offered. Though Lombardy’s
richly resourced health care system has expanded critical care capacity as much as possible, there
simply were not enough ventilators for all patients who needed
them. “There is no way to find

an exception,” Dr. L. told me.
“We have to decide who must die
and whom we shall keep alive.”
Contributing to the resource
scarcity is the prolonged intubation many of these patients require as they recover from pneumonia — often 15 to 20 days of
mechanical ventilation, with several hours spent in the prone position and then, typically, a very
slow weaning. In the midst of the
outbreak’s peak in northern Italy,
as physicians struggled to wean
patients off ventilators while others developed severe respiratory
decompensation, hospitals had to
lower the age cutoff — from 80
to 75 at one hospital, for instance.
Though the physicians I spoke
with were clearly not responsible
for the crisis in capacity, all
seemed exquisitely uncomfortable
when asked to describe how these
rationing decisions were being
made. My questions were met
with silence — or the exhortation
to focus solely on the need for
prevention and social distancing.
When I pressed Dr. S., for instance, about whether age-based
cutoffs were being used to allocate ventilators, he eventually admitted how ashamed he was to
talk about it. “This is not a nice
thing to say,” he told me. “You will
just scare a lot of people.”
Dr. S. was hardly alone. The
agony of these decisions prompted
several of the region’s physicians
to seek ethical counsel. In response, the Italian College of Anesthesia, Analgesia, Resuscitation,
and Intensive Care (SIAARTI) issued recommendations under the
direction of Marco Vergano, an
anesthesiologist and chair of the
SIAARTI’s Ethics Section.2 Vergano, who worked on the recommendations between caring for
critically ill patients in the ICU,
said that the committee urged
“clinical reasonableness” as well

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org ﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March 28, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

Facing Covid-19 in Italy

PE R S PE C T IV E

as what he called a “soft utilitarian” approach in the face of resource scarcity. Though the
guidelines did not suggest that
age should be the only factor determining resource allocation, the
committee acknowledged that an
age limit for ICU admission may
ultimately need to be set.
Explaining the recommendations’ rationale, Vergano described
how difficult it was for the frail
and elderly to survive the prolonged intubation required to recover from Covid-19–related pneumonia. As excruciating as it was
to admit, about a week into the
epidemic’s peak, it became clear
that ventilating patients who were
extremely unlikely to survive
meant denying ventilatory support
to many who could. Nevertheless,
even under the direst circumstances, rationing is often better
tolerated when done silently. Indeed, the ethical guidance was
widely criticized. Committee members were accused of ageism, and
critics suggested that the gravity
of the situation had been exaggerated and that Covid-19 was no
worse than influenza.
Though ethical dilemmas, by
definition, have no right answer,
if and when other health systems
face similar rationing decisions,
is societal backlash inevitable? To
create an ethical framework for
resource allocation reflecting society’s priorities, Lee Biddison, an
intensivist at Johns Hopkins, led
focus groups around Maryland
to discuss community members’
preferences. The resultant document, published in 2019 and entitled “Too Many Patients . . . A
Framework to Guide Statewide
Allocation of Scarce Mechanical
Ventilation during Disasters” —
noting that “an influenza pandemic similar to that of 1918
would require ICU and mechanical ventilation capacity that is

significantly greater than what is
available” — emphasizes ethical
principles similar to those of the
Italian committee.3
Participants seemed to value
most saving people with the
greatest chance of short-term
survival, followed by saving those
who, thanks to a relative lack of
coexisting conditions, have the
greatest chance of long-term survival. Though participants’ input
suggested that age should not be
the primary or the sole criterion
for resource allocation, people also
recognized that there were circumstances under which “it may be appropriate to consider stage of life
in decision making.”
No matter the ethical framework, should such resource scarcity occur, there are many scenarios
that will still feel morally untenable, particularly in the face of
heightened prognostic uncertainty. Would you remove a ventilator
from one patient who was having
a rocky course, for instance, to
give it to another in the throes of
an initial decompensation? Would
you preferentially intubate a
healthy 55-year-old over a young
mother with breast cancer whose
prognosis is unknown? In an effort to address such quandaries,
Biddison and colleagues also offered three process-related principles that seemed as imperative
as the ethical ones.
The first and most important
is to separate clinicians providing
care from those making triage
decisions. The “triage officer,”
backed by a team with expertise
in nursing and respiratory therapy, would make resource-allocation decisions and communicate
them to the clinical team, the
patient, and the family. Second,
these decisions should be reviewed regularly by a centralized
state-level monitoring committee
to ensure that there are no inap-

propriate inequities. Third, the
triage algorithm should also be
reviewed regularly as knowledge
about the disease evolves. If we
decided not to intubate patients
with Covid-19 for longer than 10
days, for example, but then learned
that these patients need 15 days
to recover, we would need to
change our algorithms.
Unifying all these principles,
both ethical and pragmatic, is the
recognition that only with transparency and inclusivity can public
trust and cooperation be achieved.
Around the world — from muzzled doctors in China, to false
promises of testing capacity in
the United States, to refutations
of resource-rationing claims in
Italy — we are seeing that denial
is deadly. The point at which preparedness dissolves into panic will
always be context-dependent. But
the tragedy in Italy reinforces the
wisdom of many public health experts: the best outcome of this
pandemic would be being accused
of having overprepared.
Disclosure forms provided by the author
are available at NEJM.org.
Dr. Rosenbaum is a national correspondent
for the Journal.
This article was published on March 18,
2020, at NEJM.org.
1.	 Horowitz J. Italy’s health care system
groans under coronavirus — a warning to
the world. New York Times. March 12, 2020
(https://www​.nytimes​.com/​2020/​03/​12/​
world/​europe/​12italy​-­coronavirus​-­health
​-­care​.html).
2.	 Società Italiana di Anestesia Analgesia
Rianimazione e Terapia Intensiva. Clinical
ethics recommendations for the allocation
of intensive care treatments, in exceptional,
resource-limited circumstances (http://www​
.siaarti​.it/​SiteAssets/​News/​COVID19%20​
-­%20documenti%20SIAARTI/​SIAARTI%20​
-­%20Covid​-­19%20​-­%20Clinical%20
Ethics%20Reccomendations​.pdf).
3.	 Daugherty Biddison EL, Faden R, Gwon
HS, et al. Too many patients…a framework
to guide statewide allocation of scarce mechanical ventilation during disasters. Chest
2019;​155:​848-54.
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMp2005492
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.
Facing Covid-19 in Italy

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org ﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March 28, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

3

