Editorial

Over the past  weeks, the coronavirus disease 
(COVID-) pandemic has marched relentlessly west­
ward. On March , WHO said that Europe was now
the centre of the pandemic. A few days later, deaths
in Italy surpassed those in China. Iran and Spain had
also reported over  deaths as of March , and
many other European countries and the USA reported
increasing numbers of cases, heralding an imminent
wave of fatalities. Following the sweep of COVID- is a
series of dramatic containment measures that reflect the
scale of the threat posed by the pandemic. Lockdowns
that seemed draconian when instigated in Wuhan
only  months ago are now becoming commonplace.
However, many countries are still not following WHO’s
clear recommendations on containment (widespread
testing, quarantine of cases, contact tracing, and social
distancing) and have instead implemented haphazard
measures, with some attempting only to suppress deaths
by shielding the elderly and those with certain health
conditions.
The initial slow response in countries such as the UK, the
USA, and Sweden now looks increasingly poorly judged.
As leaders scramble to acquire diagnostic tests, personal
protective equipment, and ventilators for over­whelmed
hospitals, there is a growing sense of anger. The patchwork
of harmful initial reactions from many leaders, from
denial and misplaced optimism, to passive acceptance
of large-scale deaths, was justified by words such as
unprecedented. But this belies the damage wrought by
SARS, Middle East respiratory syndrome, Ebola virus,
Zika virus, the  HN influenza pandemic, and a
widespread acceptance among scientists that a pandemic
would one day occur. Hong Kong and South Korea were
tested by these previous emerging infections, leaving
them better able to scale up testing and contact tracing.
Globally, many people are afraid, angry, uncertain,
and without confidence in their national leadership. But
alongside these dark sentiments, images of solidarity
have emerged. Health workers have shown an incredible
commitment to their communities and responded
with compassion and resolve to tackle the virus despite
challenging and sometimes dangerous conditions.
Neigh­bours have organised to support vulnerable people;
businesses and national governments have stepped up
to provide support for those who need it and strengthen
www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 	

social security and health services. The pandemic has also
brought examples of international solidarity, with the
sharing of resources, information, and expertise from
countries further ahead in the epidemic, or with better
results in controlling the spread. China’s experience will
be crucial to understanding how to lift restrictions safely.
Inevitably, the next wave of infections will hit Africa
and Latin America. The Africa CDC has reported cases in
 countries; Brazil, Mexico, and Peru have all reported
hundreds or thousands of cases. Most African or Latin
American countries have only tens or hundreds of
ventilators, and many health facilities do not have
even basic therapies such as oxygen. Fragile health-care
systems would soon be overwhelmed should infection
spread widely. People living in poor, overcrowded, urban
areas are especially vulnerable; many do not have basic
sanitation, could not self-isolate, and have no paid sick
leave or social security. In response to the threat, WHO
has launched the COVID- Solidarity Response Fund,
which has raised more than US$ million, and some
regional organisations have taken strong proactive action,
sharing information and receiving donations of testing
kits and medical supplies. Many national governments
have responded swiftly, but many are yet to take the
threat of COVID- seriously—eg, ignoring WHO’s
recommendation on avoiding mass gatherings. Brazil’s
President Jair Bolsonaro has been strongly criticised by
health experts and faces an intensifying public backlash
for what is seen as his weak response.
Alongside the deep distress felt as many countries
experience a peak in cases or brace for it, there is also a
growing understanding about the importance of the
collective and community. Europe and the USA have
shown that putting off preparation, in either the hope
of containment elsewhere or a mood of fatality, is not
effective. It is imperative that the global community
takes advantage of this spirit of cooperation to avoid
repeating this error in more vulnerable countries. WHO
has provided consistent, clear, and evidence-based
recommendations; communicated effectively; and
navigated difficult political situations shrewdly. The
world is not lacking effective global leadership. The
central role played by WHO in coordinating the global
response must continue, and countries and donors need
to support WHO in these efforts. n The Lancet

Reuters/Baz Ratner

COVID-: learning from experience

See World Report page 



