The

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

ined tissue samples that were not required for
the diagnostic studies to determine the extractable levels of validated tissue profibrotic markers3 and compared the levels in the two groups.
Fragments from five normal lungs were also
included in the study as a control. The 20 patients in the treated group and the untreated
group had a mean forced vital capacity that was
70% of the predicted volume and a mean diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide that was 55%
of the predicted volume. (The clinical and demographic characteristics of the patients are provided in the Supplementary Appendix, available
with the full text of this letter at NEJM.org.)
Among the patients who received EGCG, tissue levels of extractable type I collagen, which
was probably either poorly cross-linked or new
collagen, were near the normal reference levels
and were significantly lower than the levels in
the untreated patients (P = 0.001) (Fig. 1A and
1B). Likewise, in the treated patients, tissue levels of snail family transcriptional repressor 1
(SNAI1) and phosphorylated SMAD3 were also
significantly lower than those in the control
cohort. There was no evidence of a betweengroup difference in levels of total SMAD3 or
alpha smooth-muscle actin (α-SMA) among the
various groups. The empirical correlation between the degree of reduction in collagen I protein and phosphorylated SMAD3 levels was
positive, which was consistent with collagen
expression driven by TGFβ1 signaling (Fig. 1C).
We observed no evidence of correlation with collagen messenger RNAs (see the Supplementary
Appendix), which suggests that the inhibition of
LOXL2 collagen cross-linking may substantially
contribute to reduced accumulation of collagen I.
Serum biomarkers indicative of progression
of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) do not
decrease in response to drugs that have been
approved for use in such patients by the Food
and Drug Administration.4,5 Surprisingly, during
14 days of EGCG treatment, we found decreased

of

m e dic i n e

amounts of two fibroblast-derived serum biomarkers, cartilage oligomeric matrix protein
and periostin, which have been associated with
IPF activity and prognosis,5 a finding that is
consistent with an antifibrotic effect (Fig. 1D
and 1E). Our data suggest that in patients with
interstitial lung disease, EGCG treatment was
associated with a reduction in fibrogenesis and
thus may provide equipoise for the performance of a long-term, randomized clinical
trial of ECGC involving patients with this condition.
Harold A. Chapman, M.D.
Ying Wei, M.D.
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, CA
hal​.­chapman@​­ucsf​.­edu

and Others
Drs. Chapman and Wei contributed equally to this letter.
A complete list of authors is available with the full text of this
letter at NEJM.org.
Supported by a grant (to Dr. Chapman) from the Three Lakes
Foundation and grants (R01 HL142265, to Dr. Chapman; R21
AG052744, to Dr. Le Saux; and K23 HL138190, to Dr. Oldham)
from the National Institutes of Health. Authors who were
employees of Pliant Therapeutics performed assays using their
Nanostring equipment at no cost to the study.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with
the full text of this letter at NEJM.org.
1.	 Akhurst RJ, Hata A. Targeting the TGFβ signalling pathway
in disease. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2012;​11:​790-811.
2.	 Lacouture ME, Morris JC, Lawrence DP, et al. Cutaneous
keratoacanthomas/squamous cell carcinomas associated with
neutralization of transforming growth factor β by the monoclonal antibody fresolimumab (GC1008). Cancer Immunol Immunother 2015;​64:​437-46.
3.	 Wei Y, Kim TJ, Peng DH, et al. Fibroblast-specific inhibition
of TGF-β1 signaling attenuates lung and tumor fibrosis. J Clin
Invest 2017;​127:​3675-88.
4.	 Maher TM, Stowasser S, Nishioka Y, et al. Biomarkers of
extracellular matrix turnover in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis given nintedanib (INMARK study): a randomised,
placebo-controlled study. Lancet Respir Med 2019;​7:​771-9.
5.	 Neighbors M, Cabanski CR, Ramalingam TR, et al. Prognostic and predictive biomarkers for patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis treated with pirfenidone: post-hoc assessment
of the CAPACITY and ASCEND trials. Lancet Respir Med 2018;​6:​
615-26.
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMc1915189

A Locally Transmitted Case of SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Taiwan
To the Editor: Since December 2019, an out- and has spread to several countries, typically by
break of infection with the novel coronavirus travelers returning from China.1,2 Of the 3 mil(SARS-CoV-2) has developed in Wuhan, China, lion Taiwanese persons who work in China,

n engl j med 382;11  nejm.org  March 12, 2020

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March 28, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

Correspondence

2000 work in Wuhan, so the risk of imported
SARS-CoV-2 infection to Taiwan from China is
high. As of January 29, there were 7 confirmed
imported cases of infection with SARS-CoV-2 to
Taiwan. We identified a case of locally transmitted infection in Taiwan from a wife to her husband.
On January 25, 2020, a 52-year-old woman
with a history of type 2 diabetes presented with
fever to an emergency department in central
Taiwan. She was admitted to the hospital because of suspicion of pneumonia associated with
SARS-CoV-2 infection. She had lived in Wuhan
from October 21, 2019, to January 20, 2020. She
returned to Taiwan from Wuhan on January 20
on an airplane. On the same day, a throat swab
was obtained from another passenger on that
flight; that passenger was confirmed to have the
first known imported case of SARS-CoV-2 infection in Taiwan when the swab was found to be
positive for the virus on January 21.
Fever and myalgia developed in the woman
on January 25, a total of 5 days after she returned to Taiwan from Wuhan. She reported
that she did not have cough, dyspnea, chest
pain, or diarrhea. Chest radiography showed diffuse infiltrates in the bilateral lower lungs (Fig.
1A). Assays to detect influenza viruses and a
respiratory panel to detect adenovirus, human
rhinovirus, parainfluenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus, Bordetella pertussis, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae were all negative. A throat swab was positive for SARS-CoV-2
on real-time reverse-transcription–polymerasechain-reaction (RT-PCR) assays on January 273,4;
this was the fifth confirmed imported case of
Covid-19 (the illness caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection) in Taiwan.
On day 1 of hospitalization, the patient received supportive therapies, and oseltamivir and
levofloxacin were added as empirical therapy on
day 3 of hospitalization after SARS-CoV-2 was
detected on RT-PCR. Cough, rhinorrhea, and
sore throat developed on day 5, and chest radiography revealed progressive diffuse interstitial
opacities and consolidation in the bilateral parahilar areas and lower lung fields (Fig. 1B). She
continued to receive supportive therapy with
oseltamivir and levofloxacin, but she did not
receive oxygen therapy. As of February 11, she
remained hospitalized, but her vital signs were
stable and she was not receiving oxygen therapy.

n engl j med 382;11

A

B

Figure 1. Imaging of the Wife’s Chest.
Panel A shows diffuse infiltrates in the bilateral lower
lungs on a radiograph obtained on day 1 (on admission),
and Panel B shows progressive diffuse interstitial opacities and consolidation in the bilateral lower lung fields
on a radiograph obtained on day 5 after admission.

The patient’s 50-year-old husband is a music
producer who works primarily at home in Taiwan. He reported that he had not traveled to any
region where SARS-CoV-2 transmission was known
to be occurring and that he had no known contacts with any person returning from such a re-

nejm.org

March 12, 2020

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March 28, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

The

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

gion; this was confirmed by an investigation by
the government health care unit in Taiwan. On
January 21, he met his wife when she returned
to Taiwan. They shared a bedroom and meals
at home.
On January 25, the husband sought medical
treatment at the same time as his wife. He presented only with rhinorrhea; he did not have
fever, cough, dyspnea, chest pain, or diarrhea.
He was admitted to the hospital because of concern regarding Covid-19, given his close contact
with his wife. A complete blood count and chest
radiography did not show any abnormalities. Assays for influenza viruses and a respiratory panel
were negative, but SARS-CoV-2 was detected on
RT-PCR on January 28.
The husband’s symptoms developed on the
same day as those of his wife, January 25. This
suggests transmission shortly after his wife returned to Taiwan. During the hospital stay, he
had rhinorrhea, and myalgia developed on January 27, but he did not have fever (see Fig. S1 in
the Supplementary Appendix, available with the
full text of this letter at NEJM.org). He received
supportive therapy without any antiviral agents
or antibiotics. As of February 11, he remained
hospitalized, but his vital signs were stable and
he was not receiving oxygen therapy.

of

m e dic i n e

Local transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infection
occurred in this couple in Taiwan. So far, no secondary case from this couple has been identified.
Ying-Chu Liu, M.D.
Ching-Hui Liao, M.D.
Chin-Fu Chang, M.D.
Chu-Chung Chou, M.D., Ph.D.
Yan-Ren Lin, M.D., Ph.D.
Changhua Christian Hospital
Changhua City, Taiwan
h6213.lac@gmail.com
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with
the full text of this letter at NEJM.org.
This letter was published on February 12, 2020, at NEJM.org.
1.	 Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, et al. A novel coronavirus from
patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. N Engl J Med 2020;382:
727-33.
2.	 Novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV):​situation report-10, 30 January 2020. Geneva:​World Health Organization, 2020 (https://
www​.who​.int/​docs/​default​-­source/​coronaviruse/​situation​-­reports/​
20200130​-­sitrep​-­10​-­ncov​.pdf).
3.	 Corman V, Bleicker T, Brünink S, et al. Diagnostic detection
of Wuhan coronavirus 2019 by real-time RT-PCR. Geneva:​World
Health Organization, January 13, 2020 (https://www​.who​.int/​
docs/​default​-­source/​coronaviruse/​w uhan​-­v irus​-­assay​-­v1991527
e5122341d99287a1b17c111902​.pdf).
4.	 Phan LT, Nguyen TV, Luong QC, et al. Importation and human-to-human transmission of a novel coronavirus in Vietnam.
N Engl J Med 2020;382:872-4.
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMc2001573

Total Hip Arthroplasty or Hemiarthroplasty for Hip Fracture
To the Editor: In a multicenter, randomized,
controlled trial, the investigators who conducted
the Hip Fracture Evaluation with Alternatives of
Total Hip Arthroplasty versus Hemi-Arthroplasty
(HEALTH) trial (Dec. 5 issue)1 compared the results of total hip arthroplasty with hemiarthroplasty in elderly patients with displaced femoral
neck fractures. The results should be interpreted
with caution. First, patient outcomes were analyzed within 24 months after surgery. Considering that implant survivorship in hip arthroplasty
generally starts to diverge 10 years after surgery,
such a short-term follow-up does not allow for
appreciation of the ultimate outcomes of the procedures.2 It is not surprising that the authors observed such analogous postoperative outcomes in
this short-term postoperative period. Second, recent studies have highlighted a similar 3-month

cost with both procedures3 and have indicated an
increased risk of reoperation after the conversion
of hemiarthroplasty to total hip arthroplasty as
compared with primary total hip arthroplasty
and revision surgery.4 These findings beg the
question of which procedure is more clinically
and economically effective. In sum, further comparisons of long-term ultimate outcomes with
in-depth cost-effectiveness analyses are needed
to illustrate the best treatment choice for selected
patients with hip fracture.
Liang Gao, M.D.
Saarland University Medical Center
Homburg, Germany
lianggao22@​­gmail​.­com

Zhihua Han, M.D.
Shanghai General Hospital
Shanghai, China

n engl j med 382;11  nejm.org  March 12, 2020

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March 28, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

