Comment

To control the transmission of coronavirus disease
 (COVID-), the Chinese Government has
implemented strict domestic quarantine policies. As
of March , , more than   individuals with
COVID-, and   individuals who have come
into close contact with individuals with COVID- have
been registered and quarantined, including a large
number of children. This quick action has effectively
slowed the spread of new cases of infection on both the
Chinese mainland and the rest of the world. However,
researchers have realised that such measures might
have adverse psychological effects on children who are
quarantined. For children who are quarantined at home
with their parents or relatives, the stress caused by such
a sharp change in their environment might be eased
to some degree. However, children who are separated
from their caregivers require special attention, including
children infected with or suspected of being infected
with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
(SARS-CoV-), who are quarantined in local hospitals or
collective medical observation centres; and children
whose caregivers are infected with SARS-CoV- or who
have died from the disease and are thus under the care
of social charity groups. These children might be more
susceptible to mental health problems because of their
higher risk of infection, and the grief and fear caused by
parental loss or separation.
Companionship is essential for children’s normal
psychological development and wellbeing. Separation
from caregivers pushes children into a state of crisis
and might increase the risk of psychiatric disorders.
Sprang and colleagues reported that children who
were isolated or quarantined during pandemic diseases
were more likely to develop acute stress disorder,
adjustment disorder, and grief. % of the children who
were isolated or quarantined met the clinical criteria for
post-traumatic stress disorder. Furthermore, separation
from parents or parental loss during childhood also
has long-term adverse effects on mental health,
including a higher risk of developing mood disorders
and psychosis, and death by suicide in adulthood., The
age of the initial separation is known to be relevant to
psychological development. The parent–child separation

initiated in the first few years after birth might disrupt
the ongoing attachment processes, which might be
associated with poorer mental health outcomes.
The Chinese Government has implemented a series
of strategies to prevent the potential mental health
problems that might arise among children who are
quarantined during the COVID- pandemic. For
example, in many Chinese tier  cities —typically the
largest and wealthiest—like Shanghai, Guangzhou, and
Hangzhou, nurses are guaranteed to be available  h
per day in the children’s isolation ward. Nutritionists are
invited to give professional guidance for children’s
diets according to their medical conditions and
normal developmental requirements. To reduce fear
and other psychological discomfort, children who
are quarantined can communicate with their parents
via mobile devices at any time. Many citizens from
the local community or district volunteers act as
temporary mothers to care for recovered children after
their discharge, when their caregivers are not available
because of infection, quarantine, or death. In response
to the notice on improving rescue and protection for
children without effective guardianship issued by the
Ministry of Civil Affairs, many cities like Zhengzhou
opened free psychological counselling hotlines, which
were available  h per day. Most recently, the National
Health Commission of China issued guidelines and listed
specific intervention strategies for children who are
quarantined in collective medical observation centres.
For example, these measures seek to increase children’s
communication time with their parents; increase
children’s access to disease information via comic books
and videos; guide children to establish a regular activity
schedule; provide night lights and small gifts; and
provide timely referrals to psychiatrists when children
feel mental discomfort, such as worry, anxiety, difficulty
sleeping, and loss of appetite.
Although great efforts have been made across
China, the emerging psychological interventions are
unlikely to be provided nationwide because most local
support for unaccompanied children focuses only
on meeting children’s basic daily needs. We propose
that paediatric health-care workers should receive

www.thelancet.com/child-adolescent Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	

estherpoon/iStock

Mental health considerations for children quarantined
because of COVID-

Lancet Child Adolesc Health 
Published Online
March , 
https://doi.org/./
S-()-



Comment

formal training to facilitate the early identification
of children’s mental health problems by learning to
discern children’s normal and abnormal behaviours,
recognise red flags indicating further intervention or
referral are needed, and standardise the use of rapid
screening tools for mental health. Furthermore, mental
health professionals should establish evidence‐based
guidelines and easy operational strategies to cope with
COVID- pandemic-related mental health problems in
children. We also believe that children’s access to mental
health services can be improved through collaborative
networks that are established nationwide and consist
of psychiatrists, psychotherapists, researchers, and
community volunteers. Additionally, the post-pandemic
surveillance of mental disorders among these children
should be considered. Since the global transmission
of COVID- began, the total number of cases in
countries other than China have already exceeded
that in China. Following WHO’s recommendation, an
increasing number of countries have learned from
China’s experience with regard to quarantine policies.
We suggest that the specific response to the mental
distress of children who are quarantined should also be
considered when designing psychological intervention
strategies in response to COVID-.
We declare no competing interests.

Jia Jia Liu, Yanping Bao, Xiaolin Huang, Jie Shi, *Lin Lu
linlu@bjmu.edu.cn

	

Peking University Health Science Center (JJL, YB, JS), Institute of Mental Health,
Peking University Sixth Hospital and National Clinical Research Center for
Mental Disorders (LL), Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences (LL),
International Data Group/Mcgovern Institute for Brain Research at Peking
University (LL), and National Institute on Drug Dependence (JJL, YB, and JS),
Peking University, Beijing , China; and Savaid Medical School, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China (XH).
	

National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China. Update on
the epidemic situation of the new coronavirus pneumonia as of : on
March , . http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/yqtb//
bcedffbfdcedad.shtml (accessed March , ;
in Chinese).
	 Wang G, Zhang Y, Zhao J, Zhang J, Jiang F. Mitigate the effects of home
confinement on children during the COVID- outbreak. Lancet ;
published online March . https://doi.org/./S-()-X.
	 WHO. The importance of caregiver-child interactions for the survival and
healthy development of young children: a review. Geneva: World Health
Organization; .
	 Norredam M, Nellums L, Nielsen RS, Byberg S, Petersen JH. Incidence of
psychiatric disorders among accompanied and unaccompanied asylumseeking children in Denmark: a nation-wide register-based cohort study.
Eur Child Adoles Psy ; : –.
	 Sprang G, Silman M. Posttraumatic stress disorder in parents and youth
after health-related disasters. Disaster Med Public ; : –.
	 Santavirta T, Santavirta N, Betancourt TS, Gilman SE. Long term mental
health outcomes of Finnish children evacuated to Swedish families during
the second world war and their non-evacuated siblings: cohort study. BMJ
; : g.
	 Abel KM, Heuvelman HP, Jorgensen L, et al. Severe bereavement stress
during the prenatal and childhood periods and risk of psychosis in later life:
population based cohort study. BMJ ; : f.
 	 Humphreys KL. Future directions in the study and treatment of parentchild separation. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol ; : –.
	 Ministry of Civil Affairs of the People’s Republic of China. Notice on
improving rescue and protection for children lacking effective
guardianship. http://www.mca.gov.cn/article/xw/
tzgg//.shtml (accessed Feb , ).
	 National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China. Notice on
strengthening psychological assistance and social work services in response
to the new crown pneumonia epidemic. http://www.nhc.gov.cn/jkj/
s//abbcbbbcccdd.shtml (accessed
March , ).

www.thelancet.com/child-adolescent Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-

