Articles

Interventions to mitigate early spread of SARS-CoV-
in Singapore: a modelling study
Joel R Koo, Alex R Cook, Minah Park, Yinxiaohe Sun, Haoyang Sun, Jue Tao Lim, Clarence Tam, Borame L Dickens

Summary

Background Since the coronavirus disease  outbreak began in the Chinese city of Wuhan on Dec , ,  imported
cases and  locally acquired infections have been reported in Singapore. We aimed to investigate options for early
intervention in Singapore should local containment (eg, preventing disease spread through contact tracing efforts) be
unsuccessful.
Methods We adapted an influenza epidemic simulation model to estimate the likelihood of human-to-human
transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus  (SARS-CoV-) in a simulated Singaporean
population. Using this model, we estimated the cumulative number of SARS-CoV- infections at  days, after
detection of  cases of community transmission, under three infectivity scenarios (basic reproduction number [R]
of ∙, ∙, or ∙) and assuming ·% of infections are asymptomatic. We first ran the model assuming no
intervention was in place (baseline scenario), and then assessed the effect of four intervention scenarios compared
with a baseline scenario on the size and progression of the outbreak for each R value. These scenarios included
isolation measures for infected individuals and quarantining of family members (hereafter referred to as quarantine);
quarantine plus school closure; quarantine plus workplace distancing; and quarantine, school closure, and workplace
distancing (hereafter referred to as the combined intervention). We also did sensitivity analyses by altering the
asymptomatic fraction of infections (·%, ·%, ·%, and ·%) to compare outbreak sizes under the same
control measures.
Findings For the baseline scenario, when R was ·, the median cumulative number of infections at day  was
  (IQR  – ), corresponding to ∙% (IQR ·–·) of the resident population of Singapore. The
median number of infections increased with higher infectivity:   cases ( – ) when R was ·,
corresponding to ∙% (∙–∙) of the Singaporean population, and    cases (  –  ) when
R was ·, corresponding to % (∙–∙) of the Singaporean population. Compared with the baseline scenario,
the combined intervention was the most effective, reducing the estimated median number of infections by ∙%
(IQR ∙–∙) when R was ·, by ·% (∙–∙) when R was ·, and by ∙% (· –∙) when R was
·. Assuming increasing asymptomatic fractions up to ·%, up to   infections were estimated to occur at
day  with the combined intervention relative to  for the baseline at R of ·.

Lancet Infect Dis 
Published Online
March , 
https://doi.org/./
S-()-
This online publication has
been corrected. The corrected
version first appeared at
thelancet.com/infection on
March , 
See Online/Comment
https://doi.org/./
S-()-
Saw Swee Hock School of
Public Health, National
University of Singapore,
Singapore (J R Koo BSc,
A R Cook PhD, M Park PhD,
Y Sun MSc, H Sun BSc,
J T Lim MSc, C Tam PhD,
B L Dickens PhD); and London
School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine, London, UK (C Tam)
Correspondence to:
Dr Alex R Cook, Saw Swee Hock
School of Public Health, National
University of Singapore,
Singapore 
alex.richard.cook@gmail.com

Interpretation Implementing the combined intervention of quarantining infected individuals and their family
members, workplace distancing, and school closure once community transmission has been detected could
substantially reduce the number of SARS-CoV- infections. We therefore recommend immediate deployment of this
strategy if local secondary transmission is confirmed within Singapore. However, quarantine and workplace
distancing should be prioritised over school closure because at this early stage, symptomatic children have higher
withdrawal rates from school than do symptomatic adults from work. At higher asymptomatic proportions,
intervention effectiveness might be substantially reduced requiring the need for effective case management and
treatments, and preventive measures such as vaccines.
Funding Singapore Ministry of Health, Singapore Population Health Improvement Centre.
Copyright ©  Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Introduction
In December, , several health facilities in the
Chinese city of Wuhan (Hubei province) reported
clusters of individuals with pneumonia whose clinical
presentations resembled the symptoms of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), which
emerged in  in the nearby Guangdong province and
led to outbreaks worldwide. On Jan , , a novel
strain of coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome

corona­virus  (SARS-CoV-), was isolated, confirming
the circulation of a new respiratory illness, coronavirus
disease  (COVID-), with evidence suggesting that
the Huanan seafood wholesale market was the initial
transmission site. On Jan , , the market was closed
for environmental sanitation and disinfection to prevent
further transmission. Cases of COVID- have since
been reported in health-care workers and family clusters
in China, with   cases and  deaths confirmed

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	



Articles

Research in context
Evidence before this study
At present, in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province in China,
an outbreak of coronavirus disease  (COVID-) is
ongoing, caused by the  novel coronavirus, severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus  (SARS-CoV-; previously
called -nCoV). Evidence to date has suggested rapid spread
of the virus: at the time of writing, imported cases have been
reported in  countries and territories, including Singapore.
 confirmed cases have been reported in Singapore; however,
this number is expected to increase substantially in the
following weeks. In , SARS-CoV, which also originated
from mainland China, established locally, causing  deaths
after  cases were confirmed. Therefore, there is considerable
concern since  deaths and   cases of COVID- have
already been confirmed in mainland China, which surpasses the
numbers observed in the SARS-CoV outbreak.  Lunar
New Year celebrations have now ended, marking a period
of extensive travel between China and Singapore, and a
corresponding high risk for case importation. Despite
heightened surveillance and isolation of individuals suspected
to have COVID- and confirmed cases, the risk is ongoing,
with the number of cases continuing to increase in Singapore.
Immediate deployment of interventions will be required to
contain the outbreak in the event that significant secondary
local transmission is observed within the community. We
searched PubMed from database inception to Feb , ,
for articles using the search terms “Wuhan coronavirus”,
“COVID-”, “SARS-CoV-”, “-nCoV”, and “coronavirus
interventions”. Our search yielded three relevant articles.

in Hubei province as of March , . Older
individuals (aged > years) and people with chronic
underlying health conditions are particularly susceptible
to severe disease. Rapid spread of the virus compelled
the Chinese Government to restrict movement in
affected cities, with the cessation of public transport and
cancellation of flights. Despite extensive efforts to
prevent onward spread,  countries and territories
outside of mainland China have now reported imported
cases.
Internationally, ongoing local transmission of
SARS-CoV- has been confirmed in  countries and
territories. In Singapore,  individuals have tested
positive for SARS-CoV-,  have been hospitalised and
are stable,  are in a critical condition, and  have
been discharged at the time of writing. The first case in
Singapore was identified on Jan , , and was
imported from China; a further  cases were imported,
with the remaining  cases most likely the result
of transmission within Singapore. All imported cases
were travellers who had returned from Wuhan before
Feb , , with transmission to close contacts recorded
within families at a church and shop in three small
transmission clusters.
	

Two articles investigated the effects of travel restrictions in
Wuhan during the early stages of the outbreak; one of the
articles additionally investigated the effects of quarantine in
China, and the other article estimated the effectiveness of
airport screening for the detection of infected travellers.
We found no articles assessing the efficacy of immediate
national control measures outside of China.
Added value of this study
This study is the first to investigate the use of isolation for
individuals with COVID- and quarantine of family members,
school closures, and workplace distancing as interventions for
the immediate control of COVID- in the event of secondary
local transmission using a simulation model. We found that a
combined approach (incorporating quarantine, school closures,
and workplace distancing) could prevent a national outbreak at
low levels of infectivity and reduce the number of total
infections considerably at higher levels of infectivity. Such
control measures should be deployed in countries outside of
China with evidence of imported cases and evidence of local
transmission.
Implications of all the available evidence
The results of this study provide policy makers in Singapore and
other countries with evidence to begin the implementation of
relatively standard outbreak control measures that could
mitigate or reduce local transmission rates if deployed
effectively and in a timely manner.

As of March , , inpatients with COVID- in
Singapore are isolated at the hospital they present to or at
the National Centre for Infectious Diseases, a specialised
facility designed to facilitate infectious disease outbreak
response. A government-wide taskforce has been
established to increase surveillance at borders and
prepare the public in terms of awareness and education.
The Ministry of Health Singapore has implemented
contact tracing efforts to identify potential cases among
people travelling with, or in close proximity to, individuals
with COVID-. Despite these efforts and nationwide
precautionary measures, including the dispensing of
masks to households and public hospital emergency
departments being on high alert for an outbreak response,
the number of suspected and imported cases in Singapore
is expected to increase due to the high volume of
incoming travellers. Preliminary estimates indicate that
the ascertainment rate in Wuhan is ∙% (% CI
∙–∙); however, high levels of under-reporting and
misdiagnosis due to difficulties in identifying cases make
it challenging for policy makers to prepare a large-scale
response. Consequently, following the recom­mendations
made by Wu and colleagues, modelling studies are
needed to estimate the potential impact of interventions

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-

Articles

in the early phase of the outbreak when uncertainty is
highest, which is crucial should local transmission begin
to increase.
In this study, we aimed to develop a national spatial
model of COVID- transmission in Singapore to
estimate the distribution of cases across time and space
and to assess the potential impact of interventions on
outbreak size should local containment efforts fail.

Methods

Epidemic simulation model
We used FluTE, an agent-based influenza epidemic
simulation model, which accounts for demography, host
movement, and social contact rates in workplaces, schools,
and homes to estimate the likelihood of human-to-human
transmission of SARS-CoV- should local containment
fail. The FluTE simulation model requires a synthetic
population to build the contact and transmission network.
Therefore, we used the geographical, demographic, and
epidemiological model of Singapore (hereafter referred
to as GeoDEMOS-R, where R represents respiratory
illness), a modelling framework that aims to recreate a
synthetic but realistic representation of the Singaporean
population at the household and individual level. We
generated the synthetic population using national 
census data, to fit multiple attributes of the population at
the household and individual level. The generated house­
holds contained demographic characteristics, such as age,
marital status, religion, and ethnicity, of household
members. Individuals were then allocated to workplaces
or educational facilities on the basis of local transportation
data and home addresses according to  census
data. The contact behaviour of individuals in the area
of their home (ie, between family members and their local
community; defined as the home community), workplace,
and school, where applicable, were recorded with potential
transmission events as a function of infectivity. We ran the
models for  days to investigate the early stages of an
epidemic and seeded  local cases randomly among
the resident population at  days, representing a few
generations of local transmission at the time of scenario
implementation (ie, when contact tracing has failed to
identify cases within the community and unknown local
transmission has started). A full description of the model
is available in the appendix (pp –).

SARS-CoV- infection parameters
Within the FluTE infection model, we assumed that no
individual had existing immunity to SARS-CoV-. Since
data (ie, infectiousness, the cumulative distribution
function for the incubation period, and the duration
of hospital stay) on SARS-CoV- were unavailable at
the time of designing this study, we used SARS-CoV
parameters to estimate the infectivity profile of
SARS-CoV-. These parameters included how infectious
an individual is over time, the proportion of the
population assumed to be asymptomatic (·%), the

cumulative distribution function for the mean incubation
period (with SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV- having the
same mean incubation period of · days),, and the
duration of hospital stay after symptom onset (· days).
Asymptomatic individuals were able to infect at a
% reduced rate compared with their symptomatic
counterparts based on estimates from Nishiura and
colleagues.
We also investigated four alternate asymptomatic
proportions: ·%, as reported by Furuya-Kanamori
and colleagues for influenza A HN in a pooled
prevalence study; and ·%, ·%, and ·%, as
potential but theoretical proportions to investigate
intervention efficacy with a high fraction of infections
that are cryptic and undetectable.
Three values for the basic reproduction number (R)
were chosen for the infectiousness factor (∙, ·, and
∙) on the basis of analyses of Wuhan case data by Wu
and colleagues.

Intervention scenarios
For the baseline scenario (ie, no interventions), we ran
 epidemic simulations to account for the stochasticity
in infection contact networks and to calculate CIs
across time. Four intervention scenarios were proposed
for implementation after failure of local containment,
following policy options currently being assessed by the
Singaporean Ministry of Health, as standard interventions
for respiratory virus control: isolation of infected
individuals and quarantine of their family members
(hereafter referred to as quarantine); quarantine plus
immediate school closure for  weeks; quarantine plus
immediate workplace distancing, in which % of the
workforce is encouraged to work from home for  weeks;
and a combination of quarantine, immediate school
closure, and workplace distancing (hereafter referred to
as the combined intervention). Quarantine of infected
individuals is expected to occur  day after symptom onset
in a health-care facility that is assumed to have  beds
at maximum capacity (during the early stage of the
outbreak) and is fully equipped to handle full quarantine
measures (ie, negative pressure isolation rooms, full
personal protective equipment use by staff) so that the
individual is unable to transmit SARS-CoV- to other
inpatients. At full capacity, the remaining individuals
are isolated at home after receiving treatment. Family
members of infected individuals are quarantined at home
for  days and thus are unable to attend work or school or
infect the wider community at their residential address.
However, transmission within families is possible as
a result of the presence of an isolated and infected
individual. Each of these intervention scenarios had
 simulations in which we additionally recorded the
location of infection as the home community, workplace,
or school (appendix pp –).
Each of the  epidemic simulations had a set of
parameters, and was run for baseline and the four

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	

See Online for appendix



Articles

the same parameters, not the medians of each grouping.
We calculated IQRs as the th and th simulation in
terms of cumulative case count at  days. We used R
statistical software (version ..) to plot graphs and for
all analyses. We chose to present intervention data for
the scenario in which R is ·, because this represents a
moderate and likely outbreak for policy planners. The
relatively mild (R =·) and severe (R =.) outbreak
scenarios are presented in the appendix (pp –).

R=·

Cumulative number of infections (thousands)



Number of infections (thousands)









Percentile








Role of the funding source



The funders had no role in study design, data
collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing
of the report. The corresponding author had full access
to all the data in the study and had final responsibility
for the decision to submit for publication.


R=·

Cumulative number of infections (thousands)

Number of infections (thousands)











Percentile


Results














R=·











Percentile



Cumulative number of infections (thousands)

Number of infections (thousands)










Week

































Week

Figure : Total daily number and cumulative number of SARS-CoV- infections up to  days after failure of
local containment for the baseline scenario, by infectivity level
Total number of daily infections is shown on the left; cumulative number of infections is shown on the right.
Dark lines represent the medians in each panel. Shaded areas show all  simulations for each scenario.
SARS-CoV-=severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus . R=basic reproduction number.

control strategies. The median simulation was deter­
mined as the median cumulative number of cases at day
. The same set of parameters was used for each
 set of simulations for each R value. When
analysing differences across infectivity scenarios, we
compared the outputs of each simulation, which used
	

For the baseline scenario, when R was ·, the median
cumulative number of infections on day  was  
(IQR  – ; figure , table), which corresponds
to ∙% (IQR ∙–∙) of the population. For the
quarantine intervention, the median cumulative number
of infections at day  was reduced to   (– ;
table; appendix p ), which is a ∙% decrease
(·–·) in the number of infected individuals
compared with the baseline scenario. School closure and
workplace distancing reduced the median cumulative
number of infections on day  to   (– ) and
 (– ), respectively (table; appendix p ). The
combined inter­vention decreased the median cumulative
infection count on day  to  (– ; table;
appendix p ), representing a ∙% (IQR ·–·)
reduction from the baseline scenario. The corresponding
maximum number of daily infections from day  to day 
was   (IQR  – ) for the baseline scenario,
 (–) for the quarantine scenario,  (–) for
the school-closure scenario,  (–) for the workplacedistancing scenario, and  (–) for the combined
intervention (figure ; appendix p ).
When R was ·, the proportion of the Singaporean
population infected under the baseline scenario increa­sed to
∙% (IQR ∙–∙), with a median cumulative number
of infections on day  of   (IQR  – ;
figure , table). On day , quarantine resulted in a cumu­
lative median of  
 cases ( 
– 
), school
closure   cases ( – ), workplace distancing
  cases ( – ), and the combined intervention
  cases (– ; figure , table). The maximum
number of daily infections was   (IQR  – )
for the baseline scenario,  
 (– 
) for the
quarantine scenario,  (– 
) for the schoolclosure scenario,  (– 
) for the workplacedistancing scenario, and  (– ) for the combined
intervention (figures , ). The combined approach
resulted in the largest reduction in cases from baseline
(·% reduction [IQR ·–·]).

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-

Articles

Baseline

Quarantine

School closure

Workplace distancing

Combined intervention

R=·
Total number of infections

  ( – )

  (– )

  (– )

 (– )

Home community

  ( – )

 (–)

 (–)

 (–)

School
Workplace

 (–)
  ( – )

 (–)
  (– )

 (–)
 (– )

 (–)
 (– )

 (– )
 (–)
 (–)
 (– )

R=·
Total number of infections

  ( – )

  ( – )

  ( – )

Home community

  ( – )

  ( – )

  ( – )

School
Workplace

 (–)
  ( – )

 (–)

 (–)

  ( – )
  (– )
 (–)
  (– )

  (– )
  (– )
 (–)

  ( – )

  (– )

  (– )

  ( – )

  ( – )

  ( – )

  ( – )

  ( – )

  ( – )

  ( – )

  ( – )

R=·
Total number of infections
Home community
School
Workplace

   (  –  )
  ( – )
 (–)
  ( – )

 (–)
  ( – )

 (–)
  ( – )

 (–)
  ( – )

 (–)
  ( – )

Data are median (IQR). All numbers up to   have been rounded to the nearest hundred, and numbers higher than   have been rounded to the nearest thousand, therefore, some discrepancies will exist
in the summations. Due to the stochasticity within each simulation, numbers less than  indicate nearly complete suppression and should not be compared to assess effectiveness. SARS-CoV-=severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus . R=basic reproduction number.

Table: Estimated median or cumulative number of SARS-CoV- infections on day  by location, intervention, and level of infectivity

For the baseline scenario, when R was ·, %
(IQR ∙–∙) of the Singaporean population were
infected, with a cumulative median of    cases
(IQR   –  ) on day  (figure , table). At
this level of trans­
mission, quarantine resulted in a
median of  
 cases ( 
– 
), school
closure  
 cases ( 
– 
), workplace
distancing  
 cases ( 
– 
), and the
combined inter­
vention   cases ( – ;
table; appendix p ). The maximum number of daily
infections was  
 (IQR  – 
) for the
baseline scenario,   ( – ) for the quaran­
tine scena­
rio,  
 ( 
– 
) for the schoolclosure scenario,  
 ( 
– 
) for the
workplace-distancing scenario, and   (– )
for the combined intervention (figure ; appendix
p ). Com­pared with baseline, the combined approach
resulted in the greatest reduction in cases (·%
[IQR ·–·]).
For all simulations, the median age of infection was
 years (IQR –). The location of infection (school,
workplace, or home community) was determined
according to the site where individuals were exposed to
the virus (table). Owing to behaviours of school
absenteeism and work-distancing presenteeism, the
number of infections acquired at work consistently
exceeded those at school, although students could be
transmitting the virus within the home community
(table). Such patterns of transmission are particularly
evident for the combined intervention at higher levels of
infectivity (R=·), with a median of  infections
acquired at school (IQR –),  
 at the
workplace ( – ), and   ( – )
in the home community.

The median number of daily infections across time
showed that when R was · or ·, the epidemic peak
was unlikely to occur during the -day timeframe,
whereas when R was ·, a peak in cases was observed
approximately  weeks after reaching  community
infections (figure ). When R was ·, the interventions
had a suppressive effect on the number of new cases each
day, although the number of cases continued to increase
at day , indicating a delayed intervention effect rather
than a preventive effect as observed when R was ·
(figure ; appendix pp –). Geospatially, the number of
cases across Singapore at day  show a high number of
home community infections in highly residential areas
and considerable infection-source mixing (figure ;
appendix p ). The combined intervention had the
greatest effect on the number of infections, with a
universal reduction across Singapore when R was
· (figure ). The combined intervention had a smaller
effect when R was · or ·, with a relatively
homogeneous distribution nationwide, although dense
residential clusters in the north of Singapore, in areas
near the Malaysia border, indicate strong comparative
persistence of the virus despite the use of the combined
approach (figure ).
Our models assumed that ·% of cases were asymp­
tomatic. Considering a higher asymptomatic proportion
of the total infected population of ·%, owing to
isolation of fewer infected individuals and quarantine of
fewer family members, for the quarantine scenario when
R was ·, an additional   cases (IQR  – )
would be observed at  days (appendix p ). Similarly, a
higher asymptomatic proportion resulted in a higher
median cumulative number of cases for the schoolclosure, work-distancing, and combined intervention

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	



Articles

scenarios: an additional  
 (IQR  
– 
),
  ( – ), and   cases (– ),
respectively, when R was · (appendix p ). When R
Quarantine
Cumulative number of infections (thousands)

Number of infections (thousands)













Percentile











School closure
Cumulative number of infections (thousands)

Number of infections (thousands)













Percentile











Workplace distancing
Cumulative number of infections (thousands)

Number of infections (thousands)











Percentile














Combined approach
Cumulative number of infections (thousands)

Number of infections (thousands)


















Week

	









Percentile


was ·, assuming an asymptomatic proportion of ·%,
an additional   cases (IQR  – ) were
 cases
observed for the quarantine scenario,  
( 
– 
) for the school-closure scenario,
 cases ( 
– 
) for the workplace 
distancing scenario, and   cases ( – )
for the combined interventions scenario (appendix p ).
When R was ·, an additional  
 cases
(IQR  – ),   cases ( –),
 cases ( 
– 
), and  
 cases
 
( 
– 
) were observed for the quarantine,
school-closure, workplace-distancing, and combined
intervention scenarios, respectively (appendix p ). The
medians of the number of infections and location of
infection for the ·% asymptomatic fraction is
presented in the appendix (p ).
The median number of infections and location of infec­
tion for the higher theoretical asymptomatic proportions
are presented in the appendix (p ). At higher asymp­
tomatic proportions of ·%, ·%, and ·%, further
increases were observed (appendix pp , –). We only
ran the analysis at higher asymptomatic rates at the lower
level of infectivity (R=·), because we observed
substantial increases in the number of cases observed,
reflecting poor case control that would otherwise be
exacerbated and lead to containment failure at higher
infectivity. When R was ·, interventions caused
substantial reductions in the number of infections at
asymptomatic fractions of ·% and ·%. For
quarantine, by comparison with the number of cases
observed for the ·% asymptomatic proportion
assumption when R was ·, the median number of
cases increased by   (IQR  – ) for a
·% asymptomatic proportion. This number increased
to   ( – ) for a ·% asymptomatic
fraction, and to   ( – ) for a ·%
asymptomatic fraction (appendix pp –). At an
asymptomatic proportion of ·%, increases compared
with a ·% asymptomatic proportion of  

(IQR  – ),   ( – ), and
  cases ( – ) were observed for school
closure, workplace distancing, and the combined
interventions, respectively (appendix pp –). Increases
for school closure, workplace distancing, and combined
inter­ventions were   (IQR  – ),  


















Week







Figure : Total daily number and cumulative number of SARS-CoV-
infections up to  days under different intervention scenarios
when R is ·
Total number of daily infections is shown on the left; cumulative number of
infections is shown on the right. Dark blue lines represent the corresponding
baseline median when R is · with no interventions. Shaded areas around
the dark blue lines show the IQRs for all simulations. Dark orange, green,
light orange, and purple shading represent all simulation runs for each
scenario, with darker lines in corresponding colours representing medians.
SARS-CoV-=severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus . R=basic
reproduction number.

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-

Articles

R=·

Combined intervention

Baseline scenario

–
–
–

–
–
–

R=·

R=·

Figure : Geospatial distribution of coronavirus disease  cases at the time of infection at  days in Singapore
Red dots show infections acquired in the home community, orange dots show infections acquired in the workplace, and blue dots show infections acquired at school. A central water catchment is
located in the centre of the map, where population density is low. The combined intervention involved quarantine, workplace distancing, and school closure. R=basic reproduction number.

( – ), and   cases ( – ),
respectively, for an asymptomatic proportion of ·%
and   ( – ),   ( – ),
and  
 cases ( 
– 
), respectively, for
an asymptomatic proportion of ·% (appendix
pp –).

Discussion
Concerns about COVID- becoming a global epidemic
are increasing on the basis of previous epidemics, such as
SARS-CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome corona­
virus (MERS-CoV), and pandemic influenza. The intro­
duction of cases into new countries, regions and cities is

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	



Articles

likely to continue in areas where local establishment
could form, depending on the ongoing level of control
measures. In the event that local containment is
unsuccessful, our findings suggest that national outbreak
control is feasible provided that R is low (≤∙), with a
combination of the proposed inter­
vention measures
(quarantine, school closure, and workplace distancing)
being most effective. Under this scenario (R=·),
workplace distancing reduced the median number
of cases from   (IQR  –  ) to 
(– ), as a result of the high employment rates
(around %) among individuals of working age in
Singapore. This observation is consistent with the
conclusions of a review of  studies that found a median
reduction of % (range –) in the cumulative
influenza A HN attack rate with workplace distancing
alone. The implementation of such a control measure,
however, is likely to have an acute societal economic
effect on individuals who must work from home or take
leave, especially if reimbursement is not possible. Thus,
decision making becomes a function of risk as to whether
the imported cases have or will infect the local population
and cause a local outbreak. An R value of · is not
consistent with the evidence from China, and thus
prevention of community transmission might not be
possible using interventions that would be widely
supported by the population.
At the start of the outbreak, the risk of repeated
importation of SARS-CoV- into Singapore was deemed
to be considerable given that around ∙ million people
travel from Wuhan to Singapore annually. Furthermore,
the start of the epidemic coincided with the  Chinese
Lunar New Year holiday, with the expectation that the
number of individuals arriving from China would be
similar to that for the  celebrations (around
 
 tourists from China). The high influx of
incoming travellers exacerbated the risk of local disease
establishment, bringing at least  initial confirmed
imported cases into Singapore before Feb , , when
the first four local transmission cases were confirmed.
These four cases had contact with at least two infected
tourists at a shop, who were identified through intensive
contact tracing efforts. Although travel is now reduced, at
least  subsequent locally-acquired infections have
been reported at the time of writing across a diverse
range of residential and commercial sites despite efforts
by the Singaporean Government to quarantine and
isolate infected individuals. On March , ,  of the
 confirmed cases were imported with travel histories
including the UK, Indonesia, Portugal, Spain, the USA,
France, Germany, Switzerland, and Belgium. On
March , , a further  of  cases were reported to
be imported. With the risk of disease establishment
remaining high from the continued importation of cases,
workplace distancing and school closure remain as
critical interventions that can avert a significant number
of cases.
	

We found that these two interventions, when used in
combination with quarantine, would be highly effective at
low infection rates (ie, R of ·), with median of
 
 cases (IQR – ) observed for school
closures and  cases (– 
) for workplace
distancing compared with   cases ( – )
at the baseline. At the highest level of infectivity (R=·),
substantial reductions were observed with a median of
 
 cases (IQR  
– 
) observed when
school closure was used and   ( – ) for
workplace distancing compared with  
 
 cases
(  –  ) at baseline. However, if the preventive
effect of these interventions reduces considerably due to
higher asymptomatic proportions, more pressure will be
placed on the quarantining and treatment of infected
individuals, which could become unfeasible when the
number of infected individuals exceeds the capacity of
health-care facilities.
Scale-up of ongoing surveillance programmes and
rigorous contract tracing, are thus required to assist in
the maintenance of a low number of unidentified
infections at this time, with school closure and workplace
distancing being potentially effective strategies for
deployment nationwide should local transmission, with
multiple transmission events recorded between individuals
in the resident population, begin. Our simulation model,
which examined hypothetical infection spread with
 unidentified Singaporean cases as a seed population,
showed that for the baseline scenario (ie, no control
interventions) by day , when R was ·, around
  individuals would be infected, when R was ·,
around   individuals would be infected, and when R
was ·, around    individuals would be infected.
In the event that suppression of transmission through
quarantine is unsuccessful and local transmission begins,
which has currently been observed in other countries on a
small scale,, policy makers in Singapore should deploy
alternate measures, such as school closure and workplace
distancing, in a timely manner. School closure has been
used in the past in Singapore to limit the spread of
hand, foot, and mouth disease, and was associated with a
decrease of up to % in secondary cases, probably
because children generally have high contact rates with
their peers in the school environment. Given this historical
experience, a similar programme for COVID- could be
established reasonably quickly. However, at present, data
on the susceptibility of children to SARS-CoV- infection,
the number of infected children in Singapore, and the
probability of children becoming symptomatic are limited,
making school closure less desirable than workplace
distancing.
The continually high percentage contribution of workrelated infections despite work distancing being effective
suggests that the workplace is a key infection site in
Singapore, whereby reductions in workplace trans­
mission averts cases at all other sites. The effects of
school closure and quarantine were comparable, since

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-

Articles

the displacement of students to the home community
will then rely on quarantine as a measure of preventing
infection. However, asymptomatic cases, assumed to
account for ∙% of the infected population, would con­
tinue to contribute to transmission, and the identification
of these individuals presents a challenge.
Increasing the asymptomatic proportion in our model
from ·% to ·%, which is reflective of influenza A
HN, resulted in limited infection control with
considerable stochasticity, whereby the failure of early
quarantine led to outbreaks similar in size to those
observed for the baseline scenario, even when R was
·. Under this assumption, the median number of
cases averted compared with baseline ranged from
 
 to  
 cases (·–·% reduction)
depending on the intervention scenario. For the
quarantine, school-closure, work-dis­
tancing, and
combined intervention scenarios, assuming an
asymptomatic proportion of ·% and an R of ·, a
median of  –  cases (·–·% reduction)
would be averted compared with the baseline scenario.
Thus, considering the differences in number of cases
averted by proportion of asymptomatic individuals in
the population, additional interventions, such as
vaccination (where research is rapidly ongoing) or the
prescribing of existing antiviral drugs that are effective
for the treatment of related viral infections, should be
considered. Contact inhibition remains important,
but the high proportion of asymptomatic and undo­
cumented infections and missed opportunities to
quarantine will make control challenging. Even at a low
infectivity (R ≤·), a high asymptomatic pro­portion is
problematic, with   infections (IQR – )
occurring at an asymptomatic proportion of ·%
compared with  infections (– ) at a ·%
asymptomatic proportion with the combined interv­
ention’. These effects were exacerbated further at
higher asymptomatic proportions of ·–·%. With
fewer cases averted and larger outbreak sizes from
undocumented spread due to asymptomatic individuals,
the dialogue partly shifts from containment to case
management to reduce mortality from complications.
Regardless of the proportion of individuals in the
population with asymptomatic infection, all the proposed
interventions should be used in addition to other
measures, such as rapid diagnosis and appropriate case
management, if local containment fails. Current
government-led outbreak control measures will only be
successful with public cooperation through exercising
good hygiene, infection prevention in shared spaces, and
adequate education to understand when symptoms
might be indicative of a potential SARS-CoV- infection.
Public complicity is particularly crucial for older
individuals (> years), individuals who are immuno­
compromised, and people with comorbidities who are at
high risk of severe complications. During the 
SARS outbreak,  probable SARS cases were reported

and  individuals died in Singapore, with the highest
proportion of deaths (%) reported among people aged
 years and older. The same observation is thus
expected for COVID- should local transmission occur
since the median age of infection in our models was
 years (IQR –), with comparatively few children
becoming infected because of school closure and aware­
ness among parents to quarantine children with fever.
Singapore has one of the highest employment rates
among older individuals (aged ≥ years) of all countries
within the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) and a culture of eating at socalled hawker centres (ie, food courts), with around
% of people visiting a hawker centre at least once a
week. Consequently, many older people are expected to
be exposed to infection at work or within their home
communities, which could be mitigated in part by
implementation of workplace distancing and, if possible,
incentivisation to remain at home and practise workplace
distancing, specifically for older individuals.
At present, the quarantining of family and close contacts
of confirmed cases is crucial, as shown by the substantial
increase in infection rates among individuals who shared
living spaces and bathrooms during the  HN
influenza pandemic in China, despite the regular
disinfection of these areas. The protocols in place at
present, including the use of specialist ambulances,
negative pressure isolation rooms, and ultraviolet
disinfection, will assist in isolating the infection and
preventing transmission events at health-care facilities, as
was seen during the  SARS outbreak. Since at least
 medical staff in Wuhan have contracted the virus,
Singapore has provided full personal protective equipment
for health-care workers; however, the results of our study
suggest that community transmission will substantially
contribute to transmission should local containment fail
despite these measures. The main control measures at
this time are surveillance, standard testing procedures,
and quarantine of individuals who are confirmed positive
for the virus. Such measures have been used in the past
for suspected cases of MERS-CoV, which has a ∙% casefatality rate, with no cases of MERS-CoV reported in
Singapore to date, and for Zika virus, which established
locally in , with only ten cases reported in . Such
successes in preventing local outbreaks are attributed to
robust disease surveillance in Singapore. Nevertheless,
dengue outbreaks are ongoing in Singapore, which
highlights the difficulties in disease control that are in part
due to undocumented spread and individuals who are
asymptomatic; these issues are likely to affect the control
of the ongoing COVID- epidemic since many imported
cases worldwide have been asymptomatic on entry to
countries. The implementation of school closure and
workplace distancing can therefore be considered as a
potential secondary control response in the event of
infection quarantine failure and the establishment of
community transmission.

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	



Articles

Our study has several limitations. First, since
GeoDEMOS-R is validated against census data, errors
exist in our estimations of population features that are
based on data that have been sample enumerated.
Second, a large population of migrant workers who
travel from Malaysia to Singapore each day, visiting
tourists, and long-term visa owners were not accounted
for in our infection dynamics. Third, the epidemiological
characteristics of COVID- remain uncertain in terms
of the transmission and infectivity profile of the virus;
therefore, estimates of the time between symptom onset
and admission to hospital, how infectious an individual
is over time, and the asymptomatic rate were based on
SARS-CoV. Once this information becomes available for
COVID-, a full sensitivity analysis should be done.
Fourth, the contact patterns between individuals are
highly dynamic and heterogeneous across the popu­
lation; therefore, our simulated work, school, and home
popu­lations serve as a general estimation of infection
spread. Fifth, effectiveness of the interventions might
vary depending on the ongoing seeding of imported
cases, which we did not account for, and will also rely on
intervention compliance. Sixth, multiple indirect effects
from the interventions and modifications to human
behaviour are likely, which are difficult to quantify and
measure. The optimum times to implement each
intervention and how long they should be run for to
achieve long-term epidemic control should be explored.
Finally, there are multiple unforeseen factors that
remain challenging to assess at this time, such as
increased infection rates at mass gatherings, delays in
quarantining as a result of individuals not seeking health
care at symptom onset, alternate contact events in
locations such as public transport, potential transmission
events in the health-care setting, and the effects of
community-wide behavioural shifts in response to
knowledge of the outbreak.
Pandemic planning is crucial at the early stages to avert a
nationwide outbreak. In this study, we investigated the use
of interventions that aim to restrict contact between
individuals at important mixing sites: schools, workplaces,
and at home. We found that, especially for lower infection
scenarios (R of ·), a combined approach comprising
quarantine (for infected individuals and their families),
school closure, and workplace distancing is effective and
could prevent ·% of infections (IQR ∙–∙) when
compared with the baseline scenario. At higher infectivity
scenarios, outbreak prevention becomes considerably
more challenging because although effective, transmission
events still occur: for the combined approach scenario, a
median of   cases were estimated at R of · and
  cases at R of ·. These combined interventions
should therefore be implemented rapidly upon
confirmation of second-generation local transmission
occurring within the resident population to suppress
increases in the national R. At higher asymptomatic rates,
public education and case management become
	

increasingly important, with a need to develop vaccines
and existing drug therapies.
Contributors
JRK, BLD, and ARC designed the experiments. JRK and BLD created the
models. JRK ran the simulations. BLD interpreted the results and wrote
the manuscript. MP, YS, HS, JTL, and CT collected data for the models.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Singapore Population Health
Improvement Centre (NMRC/CG/C/_NUHS).
References
	 Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with
 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet ; : –.
	 Peiris JSM, Guan Y, Yuen KY. Severe acute respiratory syndrome.
Nat Med ;  (suppl ): S–.
	 Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan,
China, of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia. N Engl J Med
; published online Jan . DOI:./NEJMoa.
	 WHO. Pneumonia of unknown cause–China. Jan , .
https://www.who.int/csr/don/-january--pneumonia-ofunkown-cause-china/en/ (accessed March , ).
	 WHO. Novel coronavirus (-nCoV) situation report–.
Jan , . https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/
coronaviruse/situation-reports/-sitrep---ncov.pdf
(accessed March , ).
	 WHO. Coronavirus disease  (COVID-) situation report–.
March , . https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/
coronaviruse/situation-reports/-sitrep--covid-.
pdf?sfvrsn=daacb_ (accessed March , ).
	 BBC. Coronavirus: Wuhan shuts public transport over outbreak.
Jan , . https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-
(accessed March , ).
	 BBC. China’s travel industry counts cost of coronavirus.
Jan , . https://www.bbc.com/news/business-
(accessed March , ).
	 Ministry of Health Singapore. Updates on COVID-
(coronavirus disease ) local situation. https://www.moh.gov.sg/
covid- (accessed March , ).
	 Ministry of Health Singapore. Confirmed imported case of novel
coronavirus infection in Singapore; multi-ministry taskforce ramps
up precautionary measures. Jan , . https://www.moh.gov.sg/
news-highlights/details/confirmed-imported-case-of-novelcoronavirus-infection-in-singapore-multi-ministry-taskforce-rampsup-precautionary-measures (accessed March , ).
	 Gov.sg. Coronavirus disease : cases in Singapore. Feb , .
https://www.gov.sg/article/covid--cases-in-singapore (accessed
March , ).
	 Ministry of Health Singapore. Two more cases of confirmed
imported case of novel coronavirus infection in Singapore.
Jan , . https://www.moh.gov.sg/news-highlights/details/twomore-cases-of-confirmed-imported-case-of-novel-coronavirusinfection-in-singapore (accessed March , ).
	 Read JM, Bridgen JR, Cummings DA, Ho A, Jewell CP.
Novel coronavirus -nCoV: early estimation of epidemiological
parameters and epidemic predictions. medRxiv ; published
online Jan . DOI:./... (preprint).
	 Wu JT, Leung K, Leung GM. Nowcasting and forecasting the
potential domestic and international spread of the -nCoV
outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. Lancet
; : –.
	 Chao DL, Halloran ME, Obenchain VJ, Longini IM Jr. FluTE, a
publicly available stochastic influenza epidemic simulation model.
PLOS Comput Biol ; : e.
	 Phan TP, Alkema L, Tai ES, et al. Forecasting the burden of type 
diabetes in Singapore using a demographic epidemiological model
of Singapore. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care ; : e.
	 Department of Statistics Singapore. Singapore census of population
, statistical release : demographic characteristics, education,
language and religion. . https://www.singstat.gov.sg/
publications/cop/cop-sr (accessed March , ).

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-

Articles

	 Department of Statistics Singapore. Singapore census of population
, statistical release : households and housing. .
https://www.singstat.gov.sg/publications/cop/census_stat_
release (accessed March , ).
	 Department of Statistics Singapore. Singapore census of population
, statistical release : geographic distribution and transport.
. https://www.singstat.gov.sg/publications/cop/cop-sr
(accessed March , ).
	 McBryde ES, Gibson G, Pettitt AN, Zhang Y, Zhao B, McElwain DL.
Bayesian modelling of an epidemic of severe acute respiratory
syndrome. Bull Math Biol ; : –.
	 Wilder-Smith A, Teleman MD, Heng BH, Earnest A, Ling AE,
Leo YS. Asymptomatic SARS coronavirus infection among
healthcare workers, Singapore. Emerg Infect Dis ; : –.
	 Meltzer MI. Multiple contact dates and SARS incubation periods.
Emerg Infect Dis ; : –.
	 Nishiura H, Kobayashi T, Yang Y, et al. Estimation of the
asymptomatic ratio of novel coronavirus (-nCoV)
infections. medRxiv ; published online Feb .
DOI:./... (preprint).
	 Furuya-Kanamori L, Cox M, Milinovich GJ, Magalhaes RJ,
Mackay IM, Yakob L. Heterogeneous and dynamic prevalence of
asymptomatic influenza virus infections. Emerg Infect Dis ;
: –.
	 Ministry of Manpower Singapore. Summary table: unemployment.
https://stats.mom.gov.sg/Pages/Unemployment-Summary-Table.
aspx (accessed March , ).
	 Ahmed F, Zviedrite N, Uzicanin A. Effectiveness of workplace social
distancing measures in reducing influenza transmission:
a systematic review. BMC Public Health ; : .
	 Singapore Tourism Board. Capturing quality growth amidst
uncertainty. . https://www.stb.gov.sg/content/dam/stb/
documents/TIC/China-%Capturing%Quality%
Growth%amidst%Uncertainty.pdf (accessed March , ).
	 The Strait Times. Temperature screening to cover all flights.
Jan , . https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/health/
temperature-screening-to-cover-all-flights (accessed March , ).

	 Phan LT, Nguyen TV, Luong QC, et al. Importation and
human-to-human transmission of a novel coronavirus in Vietnam.
N Engl J Med ; : –.
	 The Japan Times. Japan reports first domestic transmission of
coronavirus. Jan , . https://www.japantimes.co.jp/
news////national/japan-first-domestic-transmissioncoronavirus/#.XjLTgzaCo. (accessed March , ).
	 Chen Y, Badaruddin H, Lee VJ, Cutter J, Cook AR. The effect of
school closure on hand, foot, and mouth disease transmission in
Singapore: a modeling approach. Am J Trop Med Hyg ;
: –.
	 Ministry of Health Singapore. Special feature: severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS). https://www.moh.gov.sg/docs/
librariesprovider/resources-statistics/reports/special_feature_sars.
pdf (accessed March , ).
	 Rogerson A, Stacey S. Successful ageing in Singapore.
Geriatrics (Basel) ; : .
	 Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources Singapore.
Hawker Centre . Committee Report. https://www.mewr.gov.sg/
Data/Editor/Documents/HC%.%Report.pdf (accessed
March , ).
	 Chu C-Y, Li CY, Zhang H, et al. Quarantine methods and
prevention of secondary outbreak of pandemic (HN) .
Emerg Infect Dis ; : –.
	 Corman VM, Landt O, Kaiser M, et al. Detection of  novel
coronavirus (-nCoV) by real-time RT-PCR. Euro Surveill ;
: .
	 Donnelly CA, Malik MR, Elkholy A, Cauchemez S,
Van Kerkhove MD. Worldwide reduction in MERS cases and deaths
since . Emerg Infect Dis ; : –.
	 National Environment Agency. Zika cases and clusters.
https://www.nea.gov.sg/dengue-zika/zika/zika-cases-and-clusters
(accessed March , ).
	 Ooi E-E, Goh K-T, Gubler DJ. Dengue prevention and  years of
vector control in Singapore. Emerg Infect Dis ; : –.

www.thelancet.com/infection Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	



