Comment

Offline: COVID- and the NHS—“a national scandal”

Ian Vogler/Pool/AFP/Getty Images

Tolga Akmen/AFP/Getty Images

“When this is all over, the NHS England board should
resign in their entirety.” So wrote one National Health
Service (NHS) health worker last weekend. The scale
of anger and frustration is unprecedented, and
coronavirus disease  (COVID-) is the cause. The
UK Government’s Contain–Delay–Mitigate–Research
strategy failed. It failed, in part, because ministers didn’t
follow WHO’s advice to “test, test, test” every suspected
case. They didn’t isolate and quarantine. They didn’t
contact trace. These basic principles of public health
and infectious disease control were ignored, for reasons
that remain opaque. The UK now has a new plan—
Suppress–Shield–Treat–Palliate. But this plan, agreed
far too late in the course of the outbreak, has left the
NHS wholly unprepared for the surge of severely and
critically ill patients that will soon come. I asked NHS
workers to contact me with their experiences. Their
messages have been as distressing as they have been
horrifying. “It’s terrifying for staff at the moment. Still
no access to personal protective equipment [PPE] or
testing.” “Rigid command structures make decision
making impossible.” “There’s been no guidelines, it’s
chaos.” “I don’t feel safe. I don’t feel protected.” “We are
literally making it up as we go along.” “It feels as if we
are actively harming patients.” “We need protection and
prevention.” “Total carnage.” “NHS Trusts continue to fail
miserably.” “Humanitarian crisis.” “Forget lockdown—we
are going into meltdown.” “When I was country director
in many conflict zones, we had better preparedness.”
“The hospitals in London are overwhelmed.” “The public
and media are not aware that today we no longer live in
a city with a properly functioning western health-care
system.” “How will we protect our patients and staff...I
am speechless. It is utterly unconscionable. How can we
do this? It is criminal...NHS England was not prepared...
We feel completely helpless.”
*

Ollie Millington/Getty Images

England’s Deputy Chief Medical Officer, Jenny Harries, said
on March , : “The country has a perfectly adequate
supply of PPE.” She claimed that supply pressures had
now been “completely resolved”. I am sure Dr Harries
believed what she said. But she was wrong and she should
apologise to the thousands of health workers who still
have no access to WHO-standard PPE. I receive examples
	

daily of doctors having to assess patients with respiratory
symptoms but who do so without the necessary PPE to
complete their jobs safely. Health workers are challenged
if they ask for face masks. Even where there is PPE, there
may be no training. WHO standards are not being met.
Proper testing of masks is being omitted. Stickers with
new expiry dates are being put on PPE that expired in
. Doctors have been forced to go to hardware stores
to buy their own face masks. Patients with suspected
COVID- are mixing with non-COVID- patients. The
situation is so dire that staff are frequently breaking down
in tears. As one physician wrote, “The utter failure of
sound clinical leadership will lead to an absolute explosion
of nosocomial COVID- infection.” Front-line staff are
already contracting and dying from the disease.
*
The NHS has been wholly unprepared for this pandemic.
It’s impossible to understand why. Based on their
modelling of the Wuhan outbreak of COVID-,
Joseph Wu and his colleagues wrote in The Lancet on
Jan , : “On the present trajectory, -nCoV
could be about to become a global epidemic...for
health protection within China and internationally...
preparedness plans should be readied for deployment
at short notice, including securing supply chains of
pharmaceuticals, personal protective equipment, hospital
supplies, and the necessary human resources to deal with
the consequences of a global outbreak of this magnitude.”
This warning wasn’t made lightly. It should have been
read by the Chief Medical Officer, the Chief Executive
Officer of the NHS in England, and the Chief Scientific
Adviser. They had a duty to immediately put the NHS and
British public on high alert. February should have been
used to expand coronavirus testing capacity, ensure the
distribution of WHO-approved PPE, and establish training
programmes and guidelines to protect NHS staff. They
didn’t take any of those actions. The result has been chaos
and panic across the NHS. Patients will die unnecessarily.
NHS staff will die unnecessarily. It is, indeed, as one health
worker wrote last week, “a national scandal”. The gravity
of that scandal has yet to be understood.
Richard Horton
richard.horton@lancet.com

www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 

