Articles

First known person-to-person transmission of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in the USA
Isaac Ghinai*, Tristan D McPherson*, Jennifer C Hunter, Hannah L Kirking, Demian Christiansen, Kiran Joshi, Rachel Rubin, Shirley Morales-Estrada,
Stephanie R Black, Massimo Pacilli, Marielle J Fricchione, Rashmi K Chugh, Kelly A Walblay, N Seema Ahmed, William C Stoecker, Nausheen F Hasan,
Deborah P Burdsall, Heather E Reese, Megan Wallace, Chen Wang, Darcie Moeller, Jacqueline Korpics, Shannon A Novosad, Isaac Benowitz,
Max W Jacobs, Vishal S Dasari, Megan T Patel, Judy Kauerauf, E Matt Charles, Ngozi O Ezike, Victoria Chu, Claire M Midgley, Melissa A Rolfes,
Susan I Gerber, Xiaoyan Lu, Stephen Lindstrom, Jennifer R Verani, Jennifer E Layden, for the Illinois COVID-19 Investigation Team†

Summary

Background Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), first detected in China in December, 2019. In January, 2020, state, local, and federal
public health agencies investigated the first case of COVID-19 in Illinois, USA.
Methods Patients with confirmed COVID-19 were defined as those with a positive SARS-CoV-2 test. Contacts were
people with exposure to a patient with COVID-19 on or after the patient’s symptom onset date. Contacts underwent
active symptom monitoring for 14 days following their last exposure. Contacts who developed fever, cough, or
shortness of breath became persons under investigation and were tested for SARS-CoV-2. A convenience sample of
32 asymptomatic health-care personnel contacts were also tested.
Findings Patient 1—a woman in her 60s—returned from China in mid-January, 2020. One week later, she was
hospitalised with pneumonia and tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. Her husband (Patient 2) did not travel but had
frequent close contact with his wife. He was admitted 8 days later and tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. Overall,
372 contacts of both cases were identified; 347 underwent active symptom monitoring, including 152 community
contacts and 195 health-care personnel. Of monitored contacts, 43 became persons under investigation, in addition to
Patient 2. These 43 persons under investigation and all 32 asymptomatic health-care personnel tested negative for
SARS-CoV-2.
Interpretation Person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 occurred between two people with prolonged,
unprotected exposure while Patient 1 was symptomatic. Despite active symptom monitoring and testing of
symptomatic and some asymptomatic contacts, no further transmission was detected.
Funding None.
Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Introduction
In January, 2020, a novel virus, severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was iden­tified as
the causative agent for a cluster of pneumonia cases
initially detected in Wuhan City, Hubei province, China.1
SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease now named
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), had spread
throughout China and to 26 additional countries as of
Feb 18, 2020.2 Phylogenetic data implicate a zoonotic
origin,3 and the rapid spread suggests ongoing personto-person transmission. Several studies offer additional
insight into person-to-person transmission.4–9 However,
substantial knowledge gaps remain regarding the
transmissibility between humans, including the level of
exposure to a confirmed case at which transmission is
more likely to occur.
On Jan 23, 2020, Illinois, USA, reported the state’s first
laboratory-confirmed case (index case) of COVID-19 in a
traveller who returned from Wuhan in mid-January, 2020.
Subsequently, the first evidence of secondary transmission

in the USA was reported on Jan 30, when the husband
of the index patient, who had not travelled outside
the USA, tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. Public health
authorities did an intensive epidemiological investigation
of the two confirmed cases.
This Article describes the first person-to-person
transmission of COVID-19 in the USA, including the
clinical and laboratory features of both patients and the
assessment and monitoring of several hundred indivi­
duals with potential exposure to SARS-CoV-2.

Methods

Epidemiological investigation
The Illinois Department of Public Health, Chicago
Department of Public Health, Cook County Department
of Public Health, and DuPage County Health Department
consulted with the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) for technical assistance and invited a
CDC field team to assist with onsite investigations after
laboratory confirmation of the first case of COVID-19.

www.thelancet.com Published online March 12, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30607-3	

Published Online
March 12, 2020
https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(20)30607-3
*These authors contributed
equally
†Memberrs of the Illinois
COVID-19 Investigation Team
are listed in the appendix
(pp 1–2)
Epidemic Intelligence Service
(I Ghinai MBBS,
T D McPherson MD,
H E Reese PhD, M Wallace DrPH,
V Chu MD), Division of
Healthcare Quality Promotion,
National Center for Emerging
and Zoonotic Infectious
Diseases (J C Hunter DrPH,
S A Novosad MD,
I Benowitz MD), Division of Viral
Diseases, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases (H L Kirking MD,
M Wallace, V Chu,
C M Midgley PhD, S I Gerber MD,
X Lu MS, S Lindstrom PhD),
Division of Bacterial Diseases,
National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases (H E Reese,
J R Verani MD), Influenza
Division, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases (M W Jacobs BA,
M A Rolfes PhD), One Health
Office, National Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic
Infectious Diseases
(V S Dasari MPH), Centers for
Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA;
Illinois Department of Public
Health, Springfield, IL, USA
(I Ghinai, D P Burdsdall PhD,
M T Patel MPH, J Kauerauf MPH,
E M Charles BA, N O Ezike MD);
Chicago Department of Public
Health, Chicago, IL, USA
(T D McPherson, S R Black MD,
M Pacilli MPH, M J Fricchione MD,
K A Walblay MPH,
J E Layden MD); Cook County
Department of Public Health,
Oak Forest, IL, USA
(D Christiansen DrPH, K Joshi MD,

1

Articles

R Rubin MD,
S Morales-Estrada MPH);
DuPage County Health
Department, Wheaton, IL, USA
(R K Chugh MD); Metro
Infectious Disease Consultants,
Burr Ridge, IL, USA
(N S Ahmed MD,
W C Stoecker MD); Premier
Primary Care Physicians,
Carol Stream, IL, USA
(N F Hasan MD); Cook County
Health, Chicago, IL, USA
(C Wang MD, D Moeller MD,
J Korpics MD); Feinberg School
of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL, USA
(C Wang, D Moeller, J Korpics);
Lake Erie College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Erie, PA,
USA (M W Jacobs); and
Boonshoft School of Medicine,
Wright State University,
Dayton, OH, USA (V S Dasari)
Correspondence to:
Dr Tristan D McPherson, Chicago
Department of Public Health,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA
oko9@cdc.gov
or
Dr Jennifer E Layden, Chicago
Department of Public Health,
Chicago, IL 60604, USA
jennifer.layden@cityofchicago.
org
See Online for appendix

2	

Research in context
Evidence before this study
We searched PubMed for articles published between database
inception and Feb 18, 2020, describing transmission of severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) using
the search terms “severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2”, “SARS-CoV-2”, “novel coronavirus”,
“2019-nCoV”, or “COVID-19”; and “transmission”, “person-toperson”, or “human-to-human”. We found 34 articles, of which
13 were primary reports of person-to-person transmission.
None provided full details of the contact investigation and
none were from North America.
Added value of this study
We detail prolonged, unprotected contact between a travelrelated index case who was symptomatic and her husband,
who subsequently acquired infection. This represents the first
known person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in
the USA. We also detail a thorough contact investigation

Patients with COVID-19 were defined as individuals
with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection. Con­
tacts were defined as people who reported or were
identified to have potential exposure to a case on or after
the day of symptom onset of the case (table 1). The earliest
reported day with new symptoms was used as date of
symptom onset. The date of symptom onset for the index
case is considered day 0 for the purposes of this
investigation, and all subsequent dates will be described
by day of investigation (DOI), starting with DOI 0. In this
Article, the numbers of contacts exposed to either case
on or after the day of their first positive laboratory result
are also presented.
Patients with COVID-19 were interviewed using a
standardised questionnaire to identify symptom history,
locations visited while symptomatic, and individuals
with whom they had contact while symptomatic. The
Illinois COVID-19 Investigation Team, comprised of
local and state public health staff and the CDC field team,
worked with locations visited (eg, workplaces, retail
establishments, or health-care facilities) by patients with
COVID-19 to identify additional individuals who might
have had exposures to SARS-CoV-2. To identify possible
exposures in health-care personnel, patient logs and
staffing records were obtained and reviewed for all
health-care settings visited by patients with COVID-19.
Security footage was reviewed to identify additional
health-care personnel and patients who had contact
with patients with COVID-19 during transport through
the admitting hospital. Health-care personnel were
defined as all people working in health-care settings
who had the potential for exposure to infectious
materials,12 including members of the Illinois COVID-19
Investigation Team. All other contacts were classified as
community members, including patients in the same

related to these cases. We identified, risk-stratified, and actively
monitored almost 350 contacts of both cases. 43 contacts
developed symptoms of fever, cough, or shortness of breath in
the 14 days following their last exposure to either case and
were tested for SARS-CoV-2, and 32 asymptomatic health-care
professional contacts who had exposures across a range of risk
levels were also tested for SARS-CoV-2. All 75 tested negative.
Implications of all the available evidence
Person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 occurred
between two people with prolonged, unprotected exposure.
No further transmission was detected, despite monitoring
contacts for symptoms and testing all who developed fever,
cough, or shortness of breath and testing a convenience sample
of asymptomatic health-care professional contacts. Further
detailed reports of contact investigations associated with cases
of SARS-CoV-2 could improve understanding of the
transmissibility of this novel virus.

indoor environment in a health-care setting (eg, a
hospital waiting room).

Exposure risk classification
Health-care personnel and community members with
potential exposure to SARS-CoV-2 were interviewed using
standardised contact questionnaires to assess exposure
and whether the individual had true contact with a patient
with COVID-19. Exposure risk was classified according
to frameworks designed by members of the Illinois
COVID-19 Investigation Team in consultation with CDC
subject-matter experts (table 1). These frameworks were
based on published guidance for Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus and designed and implemented
before interim risk assessment guidance for COVID-19
released by CDC.10,11

Active monitoring of contacts
All health-care personnel and community contacts
assessed to have had low-risk, medium-risk, mediumhigh-risk, or high-risk exposures were enrolled in active
symptom monitoring, which continued for 14 days after
last exposure to a patient with COVID-19. Active symp­
tom monitoring was done using Research Electronic
Data Capture software (Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
TN). Contacts received automated, twice-daily emails
inquiring about symptoms, including cough and
shortness of breath, and a request for a self-measured
temperature. If symptoms or fever (temperature of >38°C)
were reported, or if contacts did not respond or declined
email monitoring, public health officials telephoned
contacts daily. For hospital-based health-care personnel
not excluded from work, pre-shift symptom assessment
for fever, cough, or shortness of breath was implemented
by hospital occupational health services. To identify any

www.thelancet.com Published online March 12, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30607-3

Articles

Community contacts

Health-care personnel contacts

Type of exposure

Example

Public health measure

Type of exposure

Example

Public health measure

High-risk
contacts

Living in the same household
as, being an intimate partner
of, or providing care in a
non-health-care setting
(such as a home) for a person
with symptomatic laboratoryconfirmed COVID-19

Domestic partner

Home quarantine for
14 days after last
exposure*; active
symptom monitoring
for 14 days after last
exposure

Performing or being present in the
room for a procedure likely to
generate higher concentrations of
respiratory secretions or aerosols
while not using all recommended
PPE†, or close contact while not
wearing respiratory protection with
a patient with laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 infection who was not
wearing a facemask

Health-care personnel
not wearing all
recommended PPE
who collected or were
present for the
collection of
nasopharyngeal or
oropharyngeal
specimens‡

Home quarantine*;
exclude from work;
active symptom
monitoring for 14 days
after last exposure

Mediumhigh-risk
contacts

Prolonged or frequent contact
with a person with
symptomatic laboratoryconfirmed COVID-19§

Family members
visited for prolonged
periods or close work
associates

Home quarantine for
14 days after last
exposure*; active
symptom monitoring
for 14 days after last
exposure

Prolonged (15 min or more) contact
with a patient with laboratoryconfirmed COVID-19 infection or
their secretions or excretions while
not using all recommended PPE†

Performing a check of
the vital signs and
phlebotomy on a
masked patient while
wearing gloves and a
surgical mask

Exclude from work;
active symptom
monitoring for 14 days
after last exposure

Medium-risk
contacts

Close contact with a person
with symptomatic laboratoryconfirmed COVID-19 and not
having any exposures that
meet a high-risk or mediumhigh-risk definition

Colleagues who work
less closely together
but still have regular
face-to-face contact

Active symptom
monitoring for 14 days
after last exposure

More than brief contact (>1–2 min)
with a patient with laboratoryconfirmed COVID-19 infection or
their secretions or excretions while
not using all recommended PPE†
that does not meet a high-risk or
medium-high-risk definition

Examined patient for
5 min while wearing
mask, gown, gloves,
and faceshield (but no
respirator)

Exclude from work;
active symptom
monitoring for 14 days
after last exposure

Low-risk
contacts

Being in the same indoor
environment with (or within
2 h of) a person with
symptomatic laboratoryconfirmed COVID-19

Shared a hospital or
outpatient waiting
room or entered space
within 2 h of a case

Active symptom
monitoring for 14 days
after last exposure

Any duration of contact with a
patient with laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 while using all
recommended PPE†, brief
interaction with the patient
(1–2 min) not involving direct
contact while not using all
recommended PPE†, or working at
the same time and location as a
confirmed case but unsure whether
they were in the same room

Examined patient while Active symptom
wearing gloves, gown, monitoring for 14 days
after last exposure
faceshield, or goggles
and appropriate,
fit-tested respiratory
protection; entered
patient’s room briefly
to bring the patient a
drink but did not have
direct contact with the
patient or their
secretions or excretions

Walking by a patient
in a corridor

None

Did not meet any of the high-risk,
medium-high-risk, medium-risk,
or low-risk conditions

Walking by a patient in None
a corridor

Non-contacts Interactions with a person with
symptomatic laboratoryconfirmed COVID-19 that do
not meet high-risk, mediumhigh-risk, medium-risk,
or low-risk conditions

COVID-19=coronavirus disease 2019. PPE=personal protective equipment. CDC=US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. MERS-CoV=Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus. *Implemented after
identification of the second case of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 in Illinois on Jan 30, 2020. †Recommended PPE includes respiratory protection (ie, respirator), goggles or faceshield that covers the front and
sides of face, gloves, and a gown. ‡Risk categorisation was developed on Jan 26, 2020, before published guidance from CDC for COVID-19.10 Criteria were based on published MERS-CoV guidance and additional
input from CDC subject matter experts. Close contact was defined as being within approximately 6 feet or within the room or care area of a confirmed COVID-19 case (including sharing a health-care waiting area or
room), or being in a shared air space vacated by a confirmed case within the previous 2 h. Transient interactions, such as walking by confirmed case, were not considered close contact. Of note, nasopharyngeal and
oropharyngeal specimen collection were not listed as aerosol-generating procedures in the CDC guidance, but were included as high-risk exposures in this investigation. §Risk categorisation was developed on
Jan 31, 2020, before published guidance from CDC for COVID-19.11 Criteria were based on published MERS-CoV guidance and additional input from CDC and state and local health officials. The medium-high-risk
classification was included owing to the identification of some community contacts who did not meet the highest category of exposure risk but were nevertheless concerning.

Table 1: Illinois risk classification of health-care personnel and community contacts with potential exposure to COVID-19

contacts (including those that could not be reached for
active symptom monitoring) seeking care for fever, cough,
or shortness of breath at an emergency department,
the Illinois Department of Public Health used locally
available, near real-time surveillance data received from
regional acute care hospitals, which included symptom
and diagnoses data and personally identifiable infor­
mation for matching.
If a contact developed fever, cough, or shortness of
breath during active symptom monitoring, they were
classified as a person under investigation (PUI; a standard

case designation used by CDC during an outbreak)13 and
were isolated and tested for SARS-CoV-2.

Specimen collection and laboratory testing
For PUIs, specimens were collected and sent to CDC for
testing. Specimens included upper (nasopharyngeal and
oropharyngeal swabs) and lower respiratory specimens
(sputum) if spontaneously produced. For patients with
COVID-19, nasopharyngeal, oropharyngeal, serum,
sputum, urine, and stool specimens were collected and
sent to CDC for testing at initial presentation, and then

www.thelancet.com Published online March 12, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30607-3	

3

Articles

Day of Investigation
Patient 1

Wuhan

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

Hospital

Subjective fever
Symptoms

8

Community

28

30 31
Home*

38·2°C

Fatigue
Cough
Nausea
Abdominal discomfort

SARS-CoV-2 rtPCR results

Dizziness
Nasopharyngeal swab
Oropharyngeal swab
Sputum
Serum
Urine
Stool

Patient 2

inc

Community

Hospital

Home*

Symptoms

Subjective fever
Fatigue
Cough

Worsened from baseline

Nausea
Shortness of breath

Worsened from baseline

Headache
Haemoptysis

SARS-CoV-2 rtPCR results

Enrolled in active symptom monitoring

Nasopharyngeal swab

inc

Oropharyngeal swab
Sputum

inc

inc

Serum
Urine
Stool

Figure: Symptoms and results of rtPCR testing for SARS-CoV-2 by day of investigation
Gradient shading indicates unclear period of symptom onset from patient report. inc=inconclusive result. rtPCR=real-time RT-PCR. SARS-CoV-2=severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. *Patient 1 and Patient 2 in home isolation.

every 2–3 days. Additionally, a convenience sample of
32 asymptomatic health-care personnel contacts had
one-time nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal specimens
obtained at least 7 days from their highest-risk expo­
sure. All health-care personnel contacts were offered
testing, but laboratory capacity and availability of healthcare personnel to undergo testing were limited in the
setting of this urgent investigation. Before Patient 2
reported symptoms to public health investigators,
nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs were also
collected from Patient 2 owing to his high-risk exposures
to Patient 1.
Specimens were collected per CDC guidance.14 All
specimens were refrigerated at 2–8°C before shipping on
icepacks to CDC. CDC did real-time RT-PCR (rtPCR) to
detect three separate genetic markers of SARS-CoV-2,
as previously described.15 The cycle threshold value
ranges for the three markers were interpreted as a semiquanti­tative measure of the RNA concentration in the
specimen.
4	

Role of the funding source
There was no funding source for this study.

Results
Patient 1 is a female in her 60s who travelled to Wuhan
on Dec 25, 2019, and returned to Illinois on Jan 13, 2020,
and who was not symptomatic while travelling. In
Wuhan, she visited a hospitalised relative regularly and
visited other family members who had undiagnosed
respiratory illnesses, one of whom was later hospitalised
with viral pneumonia. No contacts had laboratoryconfirmed COVID-19, but it is unknown whether any
were tested for SARS-CoV-2.
On DOI 6, she sought care at an outpatient clinic for
fever, fatigue, and cough and was hospitalised that day for
pneumonia. She was reported to public health authorities
as a PUI on DOI 7. Retrospectively, she reported that her
symptoms, which also included nausea, abdominal
discomfort, and dizziness, started as early as 6 days before
admission (figure).

www.thelancet.com Published online March 12, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30607-3

Articles

Since first reported date of symptom onset
Total contacts

Did not
become a PUI

Met PUI
criteria*

On or after date of first positive specimen
PUIs positive for
COVID-19†

Total contacts Did not
Met PUI
become a PUI criteria*

PUIs positive
for COVID-19†

Community contacts
High risk

1

0

1

1/1

1

0

1

1/1

Medium high

7

5

2

0/2

1

1

0

··

28

24

4

0/4

0

0

0

··

Low

116

111

5

0/5

65

61

4

0/4

Total

152

140

12

1/12

67

62

5

1/5

Medium

Health-care personnel contacts
High risk

32

28

4

0/4

22

20

2

0/2

Medium high

39

30

9

0/9

29

24

5

0/5

Medium

12

6

6

0/6

9

5

4

0/4

Low

112

99

13

0/13

95

84

11

0/11

Total

195

163

32

0/32

155

133

22

0/22

347

303

44

1‡

222

195

27

1‡

Total contacts

Data are n or n/N. PUI=person under investigation. COVID-19=coronavirus disease 2019. *US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention PUI criteria for contacts of a
confirmed case: fever (subjective or objective) or signs or symptoms of lower respiratory illness (eg, cough or shortness of breath). †PUIs were tested for COVID-19 using
real-time RT-PCR for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. Only results from PUIs tested for COVID-19 in this investigation are presented here. ‡The index
patient, Patient 1, is excluded from this total

Table 2: Actively monitored contacts and PUIs owing to contact with a patient with COVID-19, Illinois, USA, 2020

Before hospitalisation, she had frequent, close con­
tact with her husband on DOI 0–6 when she had an
active cough. Her husband had not travelled to Wuhan.
She and her husband live together, eat together, share
a bed, and have frequent face-to-face interactions.
Facemasks or other personal protective equipment
(PPE) were not used at the home. Her husband was
classified as having high-risk exposures and began
active symptom monitoring on DOI 7 with specimen
collection on DOI 11, before his report of any new
symptoms.
Patient 2 has chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
with a chronic, productive cough and baseline dyspnoea;
therefore, the timing of symptom onset related to
COVID-19 was difficult to determine (figure). When first
interviewed as a contact on DOI 7, he reported no fever
or change in chronic respiratory symptoms. Later, he
reported increased dyspnoea and sputum production
starting on DOI 11, which was also the first day of
specimen collection as a contact in Patient 1’s investi­
gation. Upon further interview of Patient 2’s contacts, it
was suggested that some non-specific symptoms might
have started as early as DOI 3, with fatigue and worsening
cough. On DOI 14, he reported new haemoptysis and
worsening dyspnoea through active monitoring. He was
promptly admitted to the hospital and placed in an
airborne infection isolation room (AIIR). Nasopharyngeal
and oropharyngeal specimens from DOI 11 tested positive
for SARS-CoV-2 on DOI 15.
On hospital admission, vital signs, and physical
examination for Patient 1 were within normal limits. Her
chest radiograph demonstrated no abnormalities, but a
CT scan of her chest revealed bilateral multifocal

infiltrates and mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy.
On admission, Patient 2 had mild tachypnoea and coarse
breath sounds with mild wheezes bilaterally, although
whether these signs represented a change from his
baseline status is unclear. Patient 2’s chest radiograph
showed emphysematous changes and right lower lobe
infiltrates consistent with pneumonia. For both patients,
testing for other viral and bacterial respiratory infec­­
tions was negative. Both experienced mild leukopenia
(Patient 1 white blood count nadir 3·0 × 10³ cells per μL,
Patient 2 nadir 3·4 × 10³ cells per μL), lympho­
penia
(Patient 1 absolute lymphocyte count nadir 0·7 × 10³ cells
per μL, Patient 2 nadir 0·8 × 10³ cells per μL), and
mild elevations in aspartate aminotransferase and
alanine aminotransferase (Patient 1 peak 46 units per L
and 66 units per L, Patient 2 peak 47 units per L and
75 units per L). No other remarkable laboratory results
were noted.
Both patients recovered and were discharged to home
isolation on DOI 23. Hospital admission was extended
while arrangements were made for home isolation.
Home isolation for both patients was lifted on DOI 33,
following two sets of negative respiratory specimens
collected 24 h apart.
Patient 1 wore a facemask in the emergency department
waiting room and was placed on droplet precautions in
the emergency department and for the first 10 h after
admission. She was subsequently transferred to an AIIR,
where health-care personnel entering the patient’s
room were required to adhere to Standard, Contact, and
Airborne Precautions, including hand hygiene, gloves,
gown, respirator, and eye protection.16 Health-care per­
sonnel were enrolled in active monitoring, and potential

www.thelancet.com Published online March 12, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30607-3	

5

Articles

breaches were recorded and investigated to determine
risk classification. Patient 2 was immediately evaluated
and admitted to an AIIR and placed on TransmissionBased Precautions as described for Patient 1.
For Patient 1, initial nasopharyngeal, oropharyngeal, and
sputum specimens collected on DOI 7 were positive,
whereas serum and urine were negative. Her initial
sputum rtPCR cycle threshold values ranged between
24–25, indicating high viral burden before isolation.
Sputum specimens remained positive longer than all other
specimens for both cases (figure, appendix pp 3–4). Stool
specimens collected for Patient 1 also remained positive
longer than nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal speci­
mens; however, Patient 2 had no positive stool specimens.
Neither Patient 1 or 2 had serum or urine specimens that
tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.
372 contacts of either Patient 1 or Patient 2 were
identified. Public health investigators were able to
assess exposure risk and actively monitor symptoms
for 347 (93%) of the 372 contacts, including 222 (94%) of
236 contacts with exposure on or after the date of first
positive specimen collection. There were 25 people that
had insufficient contact information to complete active
monitoring. None of these individuals were found to
have emergency department visits with fever, cough, or
shortness of breath using near real-time surveillance
data received from regional acute care hospitals for
14 days after their last exposure. Data presented are
for those actively monitored. Of these 347 contacts,
195 (56%) were health-care personnel and 152 (44%)
were community members. Although the majority of
monitored contacts (228 [66%] of 347) had low-risk
exposures, 119 (34%) had exposures of medium risk or
greater (table 2).
Although Patient 1 and 2 live together and were
hospitalised in the same facility, and therefore shared
several common contacts (65 shared community contacts
from emergency department or outpatient waiting rooms
and 28 health-care personnel who interacted with both
patients), they also had many unique contacts. Patient 1
had 92 unique health-care personnel contacts and
16 unique community contacts, including one household
contact (Patient 2). Patient 2 had 75 unique health-care
personnel contacts and 71 unique community contacts,
including 51 from outpatient waiting rooms.
The majority of contacts (303 [87%] of 347 total moni­
tored contacts and 195 [88%] of 222 monitored contacts
on or after the date of first positive specimen collection)
did not develop symptoms consistent with PUI criteria.
Additionally, surveillance data from Illinois acute care
hospitals indicated that no asymptomatic monitored
contacts or other contacts who could not be reached for
active symptom monitoring presented to an emergency
department with fever, cough, or shortness of breath
during DOI 6–30.
During active symptom monitoring, 44 (13%) of
347 total contacts became PUIs, including 27 (12%) of
6	

222 monitored contacts who had exposures on or after the
date of first positive specimen collection.
As a household contact, Patient 2 was the only commu­
nity member who had a high-risk exposure. He became
a PUI and subsequently the only other patient with
COVID-19 in this investigation. Of the remaining 43 PUIs,
all tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 while symptomatic;
32 of these PUIs were health-care personnel and 11 were
community contacts. Although 18 (41%) of 44 PUIs had
low-risk exposures, 26 (59%) had exposures of medium
risk or greater.
32 health-care personnel contacts who were not
PUIs had one-time nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal
specimens collected 7–14 days after their highest-risk
exposure. All of these exposures occurred on or after the
date of first positive specimen collection of a patient with
COVID-19. 21 (66%) of these asymptomatic health-care
personnel had exposures of medium risk or greater. All
were negative for SARS-CoV-2 at the time of testing.

Discussion
This Article documents the first known person-to-person
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the USA. Transmission
occurred between close household contacts, from an index
travel-associated case who subsequently transmitted the
infection to her husband. Their prolonged, unprotected
close contact occurred across multiple days early in her
illness, before Patient 1 sought clinical care. No add­
itional cases of COVID-19 were identified through active
symptom monitoring of several hundred community and
health-care personnel contacts, testing of symptomatic
PUIs, or screening of a subset of asymptomatic healthcare personnel contacts. These data suggest that personto-person transmission of COVID-19 might be most likely
to occur through unprotected, prolonged exposure to a
patient with symptomatic COVID-19. Our experience of
limited transmission of SARS-CoV-2 differs from that
documented in Wuhan, where transmission has been
reported to occur across the wider community and in
health-care personnel,6 and from experiences of other
similar coronaviruses.17–19 The severity of illness, the extent
of viral shedding, and timing of exposures to a symp­
tomatic patient might all have contributed to the limited
transmission described here. Infection control measures
within the hospital setting and an aggressive public health
response might also have prevented further exposures.
Much like the first US case of COVID-19 in Washington,20
both Illinois patients had mild-to-moderate illnesses that
started with non-specific symptoms, making early iden­
tification difficult for patients, clinicians, and public
health investigators. Furthermore, Patient 2’s baseline
cough and dyspnoea made iden­
tifying new symptoms
challenging. These factors have implications for detection
of future cases. Clinicians and public health officials
should maintain a low threshold for testing in patients
with comorbidities that might obscure obvious signs and
symptoms of COVID-19.

www.thelancet.com Published online March 12, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30607-3

Articles

The timing and duration of viral shedding after
SARS-CoV-2 infection is unknown. In the two Illinois
patients, sputum specimens remained rtPCR-positive
longer than other specimen types. Recognising that rtPCR
testing detects any SARS-CoV-2 RNA, not necessarily
infectious virus, further studies are needed to understand
how viral shedding and detection are associated with
transmission. Such studies have implications for public
health recommendations regarding the type and duration
of isolation required for patients with COVID-19 and will
allow for more focused and targeted contact tracing and
testing of appropriate specimens based on duration of
illness.
These data are preliminary and subject to several
limitations. First, this Article describes only one known
transmission event and the associated contact investi­
gation. Findings might not be generalisable or repre­
sentative of broader transmission patterns. Second, this
investigation might not have identified all individuals
with potential exposure to SARS-CoV-2, because epi­
demio­logical investigations are dependent on individuals’
recall of places visited, people seen, and symptom onset.
The date of symptom onset for Patient 2 was especially
difficult to ascertain. Given this uncertainty, we applied a
conservative approach for identifying contacts of Patient 2
by using the earliest reported date of possible symptom
onset, DOI 3. This could have artificially increased the
number of contacts and provided false reassurance of
infrequent transmission. Therefore, we also present data
separately for exposures that occurred on or after the first
known date of viral positivity.
Third, this investigation took place before published
CDC guidance for classifying exposure risk among
contacts of patients with COVID-19.10,12 The risk classi­
fication used here differed from the now published
guidance in some key areas. For example, we considered
nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal specimen collection
aerosol-generating procedures, and therefore classified
health-care personnel performing these without all
recommended PPE as high risk, whereas they are
classified as medium risk according to the guidance.
Additionally, we included community members as
contacts if they entered the same indoor environment
(eg, hospital waiting room) within 2 h of a patient with
COVID-19, an approach based on other viruses with
airborne transmission patterns, such as measles. Current
interim guidance requires contacts to have been in the
room at the same time as a patient with COVID-19.
Therefore, the risk stratifications used here might not be
comparable to future investigations using this guidance.
Fourth, nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal specimens
collected on both PUIs and asymptomatic health-care
personnel contacts were collected at a single timepoint;
a single negative SARS-CoV-2 rtPCR might not be
sufficient to definitively rule out infection over a 14-day
incubation period, and only a convenience sample of a
minority of health-care personnel contacts were tested in

this study, albeit weighted to capture those with higherrisk exposures. Additionally, the active symptom moni­
toring employed here would not detect asymptomatic
transmission. Future serological studies of exposed
contacts will allow a better understanding of asymp­
tomatic infection rates. Furthermore, updated CDC
guidance recommends including sore throat as a
possible symptom of COVID-19 when evaluating healthcare personnel,10 whereas in this investigation, only
those with fever, cough, or shortness of breath were
tested for SARS-CoV-2.
Nevertheless, our ongoing investigation has only
detected transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in a single house­
hold contact with frequent, prolonged interactions with
the index patient. The absence of COVID-19 among healthcare personnel supports recommendations regarding
appropriate infection control. These findings also support
CDC’s assessment that, without using appropriate PPE,
people living in the same household as, or providing care
in a non-health-care setting for, a person with symptomatic
laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 have high-risk exposure.21
In these contexts, CDC’s recommendation for people with
high-risk exposures to remain quarantined with no public
activities might be effective in reducing onward person-toperson transmission of SARS-CoV-2.11 Given the difficulty
in detecting new symptoms in patients with underlying
lung disease, CDC recommends that clinicians consi­
dering a diagnosis of COVID-19 should discuss testing
with public health departments on a case-by-case basis.22
Patients with potential exposure to SARS-CoV-2 with a
fever, cough, or shortness of breath should call their
health-care provider before seeking care so that appro­
priate preventive actions can be implemented.21 Healthcare facilities should rapidly triage and isolate suspected
PUIs and notify infection prevention services and local
health departments for support in testing, management,
and containment efforts.22
Contributors
IG, TDM, JCH, and HLK each led aspects of the contact investigation and
JRV and JEL provided overall leadership and guidance to the investigation.
IG, TDM, JCH, HLK, DC, KJ, RR, SM-E, SRB, MP, MJF, RKC, KAW,
DPB, HER, MW, CW, DM, JaK, SAN, IB, MWJ, VSD, MTP, JuK, EMC,
NOE, JRV, and JEL completed the investigation of cases and collected
epidemiological data. NSA, WCS, and NFH provided clinical care to the
patients and assisted with clinical descriptions. XL and SL described and
did laboratory specimen processes and testing for all patients. JCH, HLK,
SAN, IB, VC, CMM, MAR, SIG, and JRV provided technical assistance
and input in content areas, including infection control, epidemiological
methods, medical countermeasures, and subject matter expertise.
IG, TDM, and JEL drafted and revised this manuscript. All authors
reviewed, revised, and approved the final manuscript.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
We thank the patients, staff at local and state health departments of
Illinois, staff at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) Division of Viral Disease Laboratory, CDC staff at the Emergency
Operations Center, and members of the COVID-19 response teams at
the local, state, and national levels for their input and collaboration on
this investigation. For their partnership and dedication, we thank the

www.thelancet.com Published online March 12, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30607-3	

7

Articles

clinical team and associates of AMITA Health St Alexius Medical
Center, including Charmaine Arosen, Roxann Barber, Candi Boros,
Jeffrey Butler, Joan Cappelletti, Carla Casia, James Collier,
Paula Crossen, Polly Davenport, Steven Dlugo Mindy Doumani,
Suzanne Dwyer, Allison Folkerts, Darlene Gallagher, Karen Gorman,
Melissa Granato, Michael Handler, Michelle Hereford, Lauren Johnson,
Michelle Johnston, Lynwood Jones, Mary Kerber, Kihe Kim, Craig Kuhl,
Monica Kziazcyk, Adam Leung, Cindie Lietzke, Ann Lucey,
Stuart Marcus, Tim Mathews, Rosemarie Mayer-Semar,
Connie Noltemeyer, Shawn O’Connor, Mary Ann Palermo, Ana Payne,
Carol Pfeifer, Chris Quinlan, Monica Rodriguez-Simzky, Deborah Rudd,
Johanna Senyk, Vrusha Shastri, Natalie Sowizral, Lisa Sturm,
Jeremy Swaw, Thor Thordarson, Jennylee Vazquez, Kim Vogt,
Jaime Zalewski, and Eric Zemaitaitis.
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this Article do not
necessarily reflect the opinions of the CDC or the institutions with
which the authors are affiliated.
References
1	 WHO. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak. World Health
Organization, 2020. https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/
novel-coronavirus-2019 (accessed Feb 12, 2020).
2	 CDC. Locations with confirmed COVID-19 cases, global map.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020. https://www.cdc.
gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/locations-confirmed-cases.html#map
(accessed Feb 12, 2020).
3	 Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, et al. Genomic characterisation and
epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus
origins and receptor binding. Lancet 2020; 395: 565–74.
4	 Chan JF-W, Yuan S, Kok K-H, et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia
associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-toperson transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet 2020;
395: 514–23.
5	 Phan L, Nguyen T, Luong Q, et al. Importation and human-tohuman transmission of a novel coronavirus in Vietnam.
N Engl J Med 2020; 382: 872–74.
6	 Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan,
China, of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia. N Engl J Med
2020; published online Jan 29. DOI:10.1056/NEJMoa2001316.
7	 Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, et al. Epidemiological and clinical
characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in
Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet 2020; 395: 507–13.
8	 WHO. Statement on the meeting of the International Health
Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding the outbreak
of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). World Health Organization,
Jan 23, 2020. https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/23-01-2020statement-on-the-meeting-of-the-international-health-regulations(2005)-emergency-committee-regarding-the-outbreak-of-novelcoronavirus-(2019-ncov) (accessed Feb 12, 2020).
9	 Park SW, Bolker BM, Champredon D, et al. Reconciling earlyoutbreak estimates of the basic reproductive number and its
uncertainty: framework and applications to the novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) outbreak. medRxiv 2020; published online Feb 7.
DOI:10.1101/2020.01.30.20019877 (preprint).

8	

10	 CDC. Interim U.S. guidance for risk assessment and public health
management of healthcare personnel with potential exposure in a
healthcare setting to patients with 2019 novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-riskassesment-hcp.html (accessed Feb 12, 2020).
11	 CDC. Interim US guidance for risk assessment and public health
management of persons with potential 2019 novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) exposure in travel-associated or community settings.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020. https://www.cdc.
gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/risk-assessment.html (accessed
Feb 12, 2020).
12	 CDC. Appendix 2. Terminology. Infection control in healthcare
personnel: infrastructure and routine practices for occupational
infection prevention and control services (2019). Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/
guidelines/healthcare-personnel/appendix/terminology.html
(accessed Feb 17, 2020).
13	 CDC. Health alert network: update and interim guidance on
outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2020. https://emergency.cdc.gov/
han/han00427.asp (accessed Feb 12, 2020).
14	 CDC. Interim guidelines for collecting, handling, and testing
clinical specimens from persons under investigation (PUIs) for
2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
lab/guidelines-clinical-specimens.html (accessed Feb 12, 2020).
15	 CDC. Research use only real-time RT-PCR protocol for
identification of 2019-nCoV. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/
rt-pcr-detection-instructions.html (accessed Feb 12, 2020).
16	 CDC. Infection control basics. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/basics/
index.html (accessed Feb 19, 2020).
17	 Chowell G, Abdirizak F, Lee S, et al. Transmission characteristics of
MERS and SARS in the healthcare setting: a comparative study.
BMC Med 2015; 13: 210.
18	 Cowling BJ, Park M, Fang VJ, Wu P, Leung GM, Wu JT.
Preliminary epidemiologic assessment of MERS-CoV outbreak in
South Korea, May–June 2015. Euro Surveill 2015; 20: 21175.
19	 Shen Z, Ning F, Zhou W, et al. Superspreading SARS events,
Beijing, 2003. Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10: 256–60.
20	 Holshue, M, DeBolt C, Lindquist S, et al. First case of 2019 novel
coronavirus in the United States. N Engl J Med 2020; 382: 929–36.
21	 CDC. Interim guidance for preventing the spread of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) in homes and residential communities.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020. https://www.cdc.
gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-prevent-spread.html
(accessed Feb 19, 2020).
22	 CDC. Evaluating and reporting persons under investigation (PUI).
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020. https://www.cdc.
gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-criteria.html (accessed
Feb 19, 2020).

www.thelancet.com Published online March 12, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30607-3

