Policing the Coronavirus Outbreak: Processes and Prospects for Collective
Disorder

Clifford Stott, Professor of Psychology, University of Keele. c.stott@keele.a.cuk

C The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
V

For permissions please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

1

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/police/paaa014/5812788 by guest on 28 March 2020

Stephen Reicher, Wardlaw Professor of Psychology, University of St. Andrews. sdr@st-andrews.ac.uk

Policing the Coronavirus Outbreak: Processes and Prospects for Collective
Disorder

How riots start
Contrary to common opinion, riots rarely start simply because people are frustrated or because
they do not get what they want or need. Rather, contemporary research1 suggests that three factors
are necessary to create the potential for major rioting:




First, it is necessary for people to develop a sense of illegitimacy and grievance: that is,
something they experience as being done or denied to them by another group unjustifiably.
Second, this grievance relates to an ‘ingroup’ which people belong to psychologically (e.g.
neighbourhood, community, class, ethnic grouping). Rioting stems from what is happening
to ‘us’.
Third, it is necessary to be able to identify an agent – or outgroup - who is seen as the
source of grievance (e.g. government, army, police). Rioting requires a ‘them’ to target.

It is important to stress that these conditions do not necessarily pre-exist riots. They can develop
during collective events especially where the intervention of authority is seen as indiscriminate and
excessive, particularly if it involves the use of force by police2.
It is equally important to recognise that, even when these three conditions are in place, it is not
that any confrontational incident will generate widespread conflict (as implied by the familiar
metaphor of ‘tinder’ and ‘spark’). Rather the incident is precipitating because it encapsulates a more
generalised sense of ‘our’ grievances against ‘them’3.
It follows from this, that avoiding the possibility of riots during the coronavirus outbreak requires
an understanding of both (a) the general way in which people represent and understand what
groups are involved and the relations between these groups, and (b) the ways in which specific
situations involving these groups are handled by the authorities.
‘Us’ and ‘them’ in the coronavirus outbreak
A core risk factor governing the emergence of social tension/conflict during the outbreak of
Covid-19 will be the extent to which there is a widespread sense that some sections of the
community are being treated unfairly as a consequence of policy measures. This may be because
different measures taken by the authorities apply to different groups or because the same measure
impacts differently on different groups. For instance, if quarantining measures (e.g. self isolation)
are seen as disproportionately penalising poorer groups in society (who are less able to afford time
off work), then there is a real potential for social division between the ‘haves’ and the ‘have nots’.
The risk may be amplified when agencies who then enforce such measures (i.e. police, army, etc.)
are then seen as agents of privileged groups rather than neutral guardians of law and order. In such
circumstances there is a danger of these enforcement agencies becoming seen as the illegitimate
agent of the ‘other’ and for a loss of trust and conflict to emerge. In such contexts, minor
confrontations in one location can then be seen by others in different locations as indicative of
wider illegitimacies in their relationship to authority and disorder can begin to escalate and spread4.
In order to mitigate against these possibilities and risks, two general approaches are critical. The
first concerns the overall framing of the outbreak by Government and media. The virus affects
the whole community and therefore the outbreak needs to be seen in collective terms, with policies

2
http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/police

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/police/paaa014/5812788 by guest on 28 March 2020

This briefing is divided into three parts. First, we outline the factors which lead to incidents of
collective disorder (or riots). Second, we consider how the overall response to the coronavirus
outbreak, and the role of the police within this response, will impact the probability of such
disorder. Third, we apply these understandings to three specific scenarios of potential disorder.

oriented to securing the overall good of the community and with prioritisation of resources
towards the most socially vulnerable (e.g. those less able to secure access to health care, those less
able to self-isolate, those most at risk from infection).

The science and theory underpinning these recommendations are already incorporated into
national police guidance in the UK for policing public order. This depends upon applying the four
principles of facilitative policing7.





The police (and also other agencies such as the army) need to educate themselves concerning
the nature, beliefs, values and norms of the different communities they are dealing with.
The police/army need to focus on facilitating legitimate goals and priorities of these
different communities
The police/army need to communicate clearly and consistently with those communities
explaining how their actions are designed to facilitate community goals and negotiating
with community representatives how they can be achieved.
Where some people act in unlawful or disruptive ways, police interventions must be
proportional, targeted and must thereby differentiate between such individuals and the rest
of the community.

Using these principles, the police and army should prioritise gaining the consent and support of
the local population surrounding them; it is essential that they are seen to be helping the
community reach their own goals rather than imposing their own goals on the community. What
is more, the ability to enact these principles depends in turn on the extent to which they understand
the diverse array of community perspectives.
Specific scenarios
The need for the police to work with and for the community is why, during a crisis such as the
present one, the maintenance and indeed the extension of community dialogue and
neighbourhood policing become more urgent than ever8. In this regard it is important to consider
what police resources will be available (e.g. PSUs via Mutual Aid) and how they will be mobilised
from one place to another in ways that support local neighbourhood policing operations,
community relations and goals. Following the guidelines given to Behavioural Science group, we
use three examples to translate the general principles outlined above into specific scenarios. The
potential for violence in such cases will be directly related to the issues addressed in the previous
section.
a) Family members are turned away from hospital due to demand from high-risk coronavirus patients: If there is
already a clear understanding that healthcare rationing is a matter of protecting the most vulnerable
in the community, when those who are less vulnerable act against the communal interest by
demanding resources, then any anger from individuals and their families who are turned away is
unlikely to generalise. Moreover, other members of the community are more likely to support
police action.

3
http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/police

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/police/paaa014/5812788 by guest on 28 March 2020

When seen in such terms, both evidence and theory suggest that people will be more willing to
accept the actions of the authorities as ‘procedurally fair,’ even if the outcome of these actions
means that some will experience negative outcomes and personal sacrifices5. As a result, people
and communities will be more likely to self-regulate (for instance, complying with the instructions
of authority figures, spontaneously challenging those who act against the communal interest) and
to be more positive towards external regulation by the police and other agencies. From this
perspective the public are potentially the most powerful resource the authorities have to deal with
emergencies. The role of the police and other authorities, then, is to work with citizens to scaffold,
rather than substitute for (or, at worst, suppress) community ‘self-regulation’. Moreover, insofar as
they are able to act in this way, the police come to be seen as ‘of us’ and ‘for us’6.

In operational terms, such a scenario means that the police should set up local command structures
that involve input from community members and that they should work with community
mediators to try to prevent people presenting at hospital unnecessarily. In particular,
communication about the need to ration resources comes best from within the community itself
and may increase the potential for community self-regulation decreasing the likelihood of people
presenting unnecessarily.

c) Most religious groups suspend their gatherings, but others do not. This would be a particularly egregious
example of the previous scenario, especially if the groups still meeting were from an ethnic
minority where prior community tensions have been high. In such cases the probability of violence
would be high and the police themselves may come under attack for intervening to prevent these
attacks. Hence, it would be very important to avoid such situations through prior dialogue, through
assessing religious needs and priorities at a local level, and, where necessary, by facilitating
alternative means of satisfying these without gathering. Here more than ever, a focus on
understanding and facilitating the legitimate goals and values of a community (e.g. to worship)
combined with the early implementation of structures for police dialogue with all sectors of the
diverse communities within a specific area is critical to avoiding circumstances where conflict
might develop.
Conclusions
Even though the coronavirus outbreak may lead to some very difficult decisions that involve
denying resources to those in considerable need, social tension and conflict are far from inevitable.
Characteristically people respond to emergencies by developing a very strong sense of community
and displaying remarkable altruism. With careful management both at a general policy level and in
terms of sensitive community-based and dialogue led policing, it will be possible to maintain a
sense of common endeavour and hence to draw on the community as a key resource in dealing
with the crisis. The two keys are to build a sense of ‘us-ness’ –- of shared identity and shared fate
- at every decision point and to be especially sensitive to any fault lines in the community which
could lead particular groups (including the authorities) to be seen as ‘them’ rather than ‘us’.
1

Thompson, E. P. (1971). The moral economy of the English crowd in the eighteenth century. Past & present, 50,
76-136.
Reicher, S.D. & Stott, C. (2011) Mad Mobs and Englishmen. London: Constable & Robinson.

4
http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/police

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/police/paaa014/5812788 by guest on 28 March 2020

b) Anger arises at those who refuse to self-isolate and are seen to act in ways that spread disease: This is the
potential ‘dark side’ of creating strong norms of acting for the communal good and of collective
self-regulation that targets norm violators. This can easily spill over into vigilantism unless care is
taken to communicate clearly how disapproval should be expressed in strictly limited ways, how it
is important to report serious norm violations, and that violence against violators will itself require
policing resources that could better be used elsewhere and hence undermines collective interests.
Such vigilantism becomes particularly serious under conditions where individuals are treated as
proxies for groups and hostility extends to all members of the group – the notion, for instance,
that ethnic minority members have behaved in ways that endanger the health of the majority has
been at the root of pogroms throughout history. Hence it is particularly important to monitor the
activities of ‘hate groups’ and the incidence of hate crime and to make a challenge to racist rumours
and reacting to incidents a key priority of neighbourhood and response policing efforts. Once
again, the success of these interventions depends upon the active involvement of a diverse array
of community representatives with the police at a local level both in the framing and the delivery
of policy.

2

HMIC (2009) Adapting to protest: Nurturing the British model of policing. London: HMIC – see especially
chapter 4. Available at: https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmicfrs/media/adapting-to-protest-nurturing-thebritish-model-of-policing-20091125.pdf
3

Stott, C., Drury, J., & Reicher, S.D. (2017). On the role of a social identity analysis in articulating structure and
collective action: The 2011 riots in Tottenham and Hackney. British Journal of Criminology, 57, 964-981.
Drury, J., Stott, C., Ball, R., Reicher, S., Neville, F., Bell, L., Biddlestone, M., Choudhury, S., Lovell, M. & Ryan, C.
(2019) A social identity model of riot diffusion: From injustice to empowerment in the 2011 London riots. European
Journal of Social Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2650
Ball, R., Stott, C., Drury, J., Neville, F., Reicher, S. & Choudhury, S. (2019) Who controls the city? A microhistorical case study of the spread of rioting across North London in August 2011. City.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13604813.2019.1685283.
Stott, C., Ball, R., Drury, J., Neville, F., Reicher, S., Boardman, A. & Choudhury, S. (2018) The evolving normative
dimensions of “riot”: toward an elaborated social identity explanation. European Journal of Social Psychology. DOI:
10.1002/ejsp.2376
5

Radburn, M., & Stott, C. (2019). The social psychological processes of ‘procedural justice’: Concepts, critiques and
opportunities. Criminology & Criminal Justice, 19, 421-438.
Radburn, M., Stott, C., Bradford, B., & Robinson, M. (2018). When is policing fair? Groups, identity and judgements
of the procedural justice of coercive crowd policing. Policing and Society, 28(6), 647-664.
6

Reicher, S., Stott, C., Cronin, P. and Adang, O. (2004), "An integrated approach to crowd psychology and public
order policing", Policing: An International Journal, Vol. 27 No. 4, pp. 558-572.
Stott, C., Adang, O., Livingstone, A., & Schreiber, M. (2008). Tackling football hooliganism: A quantitative study of
public order, policing and crowd psychology. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 14(2), 115-141. doi:10.1037/a0013419.
Reicher, S., Stott, C., Drury, J., Adang, O., Cronin, P., & Livingstone, A. (2007). Knowledge-based public order
policing: principles and practice. Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, 1, 403-415.
7

https://www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/public-order/?s=

8

Gorringe, H., Stott, C., & Rosie, M. (2012). Dialogue police, decision making, and the management of public order
during protest crowd events. Journal of investigative psychology and offender profiling, 9(2), 111-125.

5
http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/police

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/policing/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/police/paaa014/5812788 by guest on 28 March 2020

4

