The

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

of

m e dic i n e

Edi t or i a l

Covid- — The Search for Effective Therapy
Lindsey R. Baden, M.D., and Eric J. Rubin, M.D., Ph.D.
Covid- is spreading rapidly through Europe and
North America, but we have few specific tools to
control the growing epidemic and treat those
who are sick. We rely on quarantine, isolation,
and infection-control measures to prevent disease
spread and on supportive care for those who become ill. What we lack is a specific antiviral agent
to treat the infected and, optimally, decrease viral
shedding and subsequent transmission.
One antiviral-drug candidate is a combination
of the HIV protease inhibitors lopinavir and ritonavir. Lopinavir, which acts against the viral CL
protease, has modest antiviral activity against
SARS-CoV-. Together with ritonavir, which increases drug bioavailability, it is in clinical trials,
along with the immunomodulator interferon
beta-b, for the treatment of Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) (ClinicalTrials.gov number,
NCT). What makes lopinavir–ritonavir
particularly attractive is that it is widely available
and manufacturable to scale and that it could be
prescribed immediately. In fact, there are several
case reports and case series where this agent is
being used against Covid-. But does it work?
This is the question that motivated Cao and colleagues to perform an urgent randomized clinical
trial of the efficacy of lopinavir–ritonavir in patients with Covid- in Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the outbreak. On January , the first patient was enrolled in this open-label trial, about a
week after SARS-CoV- had been identified and
sequenced. The investigators recruited patients
who had an oxygen saturation of % or less while
they were breathing ambient air or a ratio of the
partial pressure of oxygen to the fraction of inspired oxygen of less than  mm Hg and who
were receiving a range of ventilatory support

modes, from nothing to mechanical ventilation
or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).
Enrollment was stratified according to the severity
of illness as indicated by the level of ventilatory
support administered. All the patients received
standard care, and half were randomly assigned
to receive lopinavir–ritonavir for  days. The
primary end point was the time to clinical improvement, defined as the time from randomization to either discharge from the hospital or
improvement on a multifactorial set of prespecified criteria, whichever came first. The trial aimed
to enroll  patients.
This was a heroic effort. Health care workers
in Hubei province have provided patient care in
an overwhelming epidemic while they themselves
are one of the highest risk groups for development
of disease. As we saw during the  Ebola outbreak in West Africa, obtaining high-quality clinical trial data to guide the care of patients is extremely difficult in the face of an epidemic, and
the feasibility of a randomized design has been
called into question. Yet Cao’s group of determined investigators not only succeeded but ended
up enrolling a larger number of patients () than
originally targeted.
Unfortunately, the trial results were disappointing. No benefit was observed in the primary end
point of time to clinical improvement: both groups
required a median of  days. But the results for
certain secondary end points are intriguing. A
slightly lower number of deaths was seen in the
lopinavir–ritonavir group, although this observation is difficult to interpret, given the small numbers and the fact that the standard-care group
appears to have been sicker at baseline. Removing deaths in the lopinavir–ritonavir group that

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March , . For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.



The

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

occurred after randomization but before the first
dose of drug was given would provide a more
encouraging result, but such a change is debatable, since no such removal occurred in the control group. On the other hand, the trial was an
open-label one, and since the end points were
being evaluated or influenced by clinicians who
were aware of treatment assignment, they were
susceptible to potential bias. It is important to
note that both groups were heterogeneous and
received various additional treatments, including
other pharmacologic interventions such as interferon (%) and glucocorticoids (%).
The secondary end points provide both reason
for hope and reason for discouragement. The number of deaths was somewhat lower in the group
that received lopinavir–ritonavir. Tellingly, though,
there was no discernible effect on viral shedding.
Since the drug is supposed to act as a direct inhibitor of viral replication, the inability to suppress the viral load and the persistent detection
of viral nucleic acid strongly suggest that it did
not have the activity desired. Thus, although some
effect of the drug is possible, it was not easily
observed.
Why isn’t lopinavir–ritonavir more effective?
Two major factors may be in play. First, the authors
chose a particularly challenging population. The
patients recruited for the study were late in infection and already had considerable tissue damage (as evidenced by compromised lung function
and % mortality in the control group). Even
highly active antibacterial agents have limited efficacy in advanced bacterial pneumonia. Second,
lopinavir simply isn’t particularly potent against
SARS-CoV-. The concentration necessary to inhibit viral replication is relatively high as compared with the serum levels found in patients
treated with lopinavir–ritonavir., We currently
know little about drug concentrations in the tissues where SARS-CoV- is replicating.
The fact that this trial began within days after the virus was identified and that testing for
infection was developed and deployed very rapidly
means that test characteristics had not been fully



of

m e dic i n e

defined. Notably, % of those who screened
positive for SARS-CoV- by nasopharyngeal swab
then tested negative at the day  visit by oropharyngeal swab. Was this due to differences in site of
assessment, time of illness, testing characteristics,
or just the natural evolution of the disease? In addition, % of the patients were viral load–positive
at day , but the quantitative data at that point
show that the levels were low, probably near the
threshold of detection. Since the test detects nucleic acid, positive results do not necessarily indicate the production of infectious virus. These
data suggest that assessing transmissibility after
recovery from severe disease will be a priority to
help control transmission.
Despite the fact that lopinavir–ritonavir does
not seem to be highly effective in patients with
Covid-, there are many important takeaways
from this study. The investigators appropriately
prioritized speed, designing a trial that could rapidly produce an answer. What we’ve learned from
their work can help inform the design of new
trials. And it is clear that rapidly initiated, highquality randomized clinical trials are possible in
epidemic conditions, even in the trying circumstances that prevailed in Wuhan. The results of
such trials, providing either convincing positive
or convincing negative findings, will be central to
clinical care as the dangerous coronavirus outbreak continues.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with
the full text of this editorial at NEJM.org.
This editorial was published on March , , at NEJM.org.
.	 Sheahan TP, Sims AC, Leist SR, et al. Comparative therapeu-

tic efficacy of remdesivir and combination lopinavir, ritonavir,
and interferon beta against MERS-CoV. Nat Comm ;​:​.
.	 Cao B, Wang Y, Wen D, et al. A trial of lopinavir–ritonavir in
adults hospitalized with severe Covid-. N Engl J Med. DOI:​
./NEJMoa.
.	 Baden LR, Rubin EJ, Morrissey S, Farrar JJ, Drazen JM. We
can do better — improving outcomes in the midst of an emergency. N Engl J Med ;​:​-.
.	 Lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra). North Chicago, IL:​AbbVie,
 (https://www​.rxabbvie​.com/​pdf/​kaletracap_PI​.pdf) (prescribing information).
DOI: ./NEJMe
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society.

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March , . For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright ©  Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

