Articles

Health security capacities in the context of COVID-
outbreak: an analysis of International Health Regulations
annual report data from  countries
Nirmal Kandel, Stella Chungong, Abbas Omaar, Jun Xing

Summary

Background Public health measures to prevent, detect, and respond to events are essential to control public health
risks, including infectious disease outbreaks, as highlighted in the International Health Regulations (IHR). In light of
the outbreak of  novel coronavirus disease (COVID-), we aimed to review existing health security capacities
against public health risks and events.

Lancet ; : –

Methods We used  indicators from the IHR State Party Annual Reporting (SPAR) tool and associated data from
national SPAR reports to develop five indices: () prevent, () detect, () respond, () enabling function, and
() operational readiness. We used SPAR  data for all of the indicators and categorised countries into five levels
across the indices, in which level  indicated the lowest level of national capacity and level  the highest. We also
analysed data at the regional level (using the six geographical WHO regions).

See Comment page 

Findings Of  countries,  (%) had prevent capacities at levels  or , and  (%) had response capacities at
levels  or .  (%) countries had prevent capacities and  (%) had response capacities at levels  or , indicating
that these countries were operationally ready.  (%) countries scored more highly in the detect index than in the
other indices.  (%) countries did not have an effective enabling function for public health risks and events,
including infectious disease outbreaks ( [%] at level  and  [%] at level ).  (%) countries had level  or
level  enabling function capacities in place.  (%) countries had low readiness ( [%] at level  and  [%] at
level ), and  (%) countries were operationally ready to prevent, detect, and control an outbreak of a novel
infectious disease ( [%] at level  and  [%] at level ).

Correspondence to:
Dr Nirmal Kandel, World Health
Organisation, WHO Health
Emergency Program,
Geneva , Switzerland
kandeln@who.int

Published Online
March , 
https://doi.org/./
S-()-
World Health Organisation,
WHO Health Emergency
Program, Geneva, Switzerland
(N Kandel MPH,
S Chungong MPH, A Omaar MSc,
J Xing MPH)

Interpretation Countries vary widely in terms of their capacity to prevent, detect, and respond to outbreaks. Half of all
countries analysed have strong operational readiness capacities in place, which suggests that an effective response to
potential health emergencies could be enabled, including to COVID-. Findings from local risk assessments are
needed to fully understand national readiness capacities in relation to COVID-. Capacity building and collaboration
between countries are needed to strengthen global readiness for outbreak control.
Funding None.
Copyright © . World Health Organization. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Coronaviruses are RNA viruses that are found widely in
humans and other mammals. Even though most human
coronavirus infections result in mild diseases, the world
has had two major epidemics in the past two decades
from two different betacoronaviruses; severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle
East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV).
Collectively, these two outbreaks have resulted in more
than   cumulative cases, with fatal­ity rates of % for
SARS-CoV and % for MERS-CoV.
In December , China reported to WHO cases of
pneumonia of unknown cause occurring in Wuhan,
Hubei. Initial patients exhibited clinical symptoms
resembling viral pneumonia. The country’s capacity to
detect cases facilitated early recognition and verification
of the pathogen. Viral genetic sequencing of samples
indicated a novel coronavirus. The novel virus was named
www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 	

 novel coronavirus (COVID-) and con­firmed to have
–% resemblance to SARS-CoV. As of Feb , ,
approximately   confirmed cases have been reported
in more than  countries. On Jan , WHO declared the
outbreak of COVID- as a public health emergency of
international concern and put in place a series of temporary
recommendations. No specific antiviral therapies are
available, and efforts to dev­elop antivirals and a vaccine
continue. Early indi­
cations suggest that bats are the
primary reservoir for the virus, given COVID-’s close
similarity to bat coronaviruses, and while identification of
the zoonotic origin of the virus continues, the public health
measures for managing the outbreak rely on existing
national and regional preparedness capacities to prevent,
detect, verify, assess, and respond in accordance with the
International Health Regulations (IHR, ).
Since the IHR came into force in , countries have
made substantial efforts to strengthen their capacities to


Articles

Research in context
Evidence before this study
The outbreak of  novel coronavirus disease (COVID-)
has spread rapidly across many countries in a short space of
time. Few studies have highlighted the strength and gaps of
national capacities in relation to operational readiness against
health emergencies and the state of national International
Health Regulations (IHR, ) implementation. We searched
PubMed using the search terms “operational readiness index”
in relation to “IHR”, “health security”, and “emergency
preparedness” for articles published in English, between
Jan , , and Jan , . Our search found zero results on
the operational readiness index in relation to IHR.
Added value of this study
Because of the insufficient quality of information that exists
about the state of national and regional preparedness

prevent, detect, and respond to public health emergencies.
Countries have been enhancing preparedness through
the implementation and regular assessment of IHR
national capacities to mitigate the effect of public health
emergencies, including the emer­
gence of a novel
pathogen., Increased understanding of the capacities
that countries have to prevent, detect, and respond to
public health events has been made possible through the
introduction of the WHO IHR monitoring and eva­
luation framework and application of the framework’s
components including the State Party annual reporting
(SPAR) process and voluntary external evaluation using
the Joint External Evaluation tools, after-action reviews,
and simulation exercises. The results of these assess­
ments are used to develop national action plans to
strengthen IHR capacities for health security. WHO
bench­
marks for IHR capacities include corresponding
actions that can increase a country’s emergency
preparedness, and are used to strengthen a country’s
emergency preparedness and health security. We
analysed the  SPAR submissions of  countries
to review health security capacities in light of the
COVID- outbreak and iden­
tified opportunities for
further strengthening of IHR implementation.,

Methods
We analysed  SPAR submissions to review health
security capacities on the basis of the following indices:
capacities to () prevent, () detect, () respond, () enabling
function (resources and coordination capacity), and
() operational readiness. National scores for  of the
 SPAR indi­cators were applied across the five indices.
Six SPAR indicators that were not directly related to
our indices and infectious hazard threats, including
COVID-, were excluded.
The SPAR indicators selected for use in each of the
five indices are shown in panel . Each indicator of the
SPAR is scored according to a scale from level  to ,
	

capacities, we used data and information from IHR State Party
Annual Reporting tool to review existing levels of health
security capacities to prevent, detect, respond, and establish
enabling functions for an effective response, and operational
readiness against public health risks and events, including
infectious disease outbreaks.
Implications of all the available evidence
Our results have implications for prioritising capacity building
action in WHO Regions and countries, especially in terms of
capacities regarding prevention, detection, response, enabling
functions, and operational readiness. The operational readiness
index can be used to support WHO, governments, and other
international agencies to prioritise their support and
implementation of operational readiness capacities for the
COVID- outbreak.

in which level  is the lowest capacity and level  is the
highest. Countries without a score were marked as
level . Panel  shows the rationale for including the
indicators as part of the respective indices.

Index development and analysis
For each of the five indices we developed an index score
using the following steps: () we grouped key indicators
from the SPAR submissions according to our five indices;
() each indicator score was converted to a percentage;
() we aggregated indicator scores using an arithmetic
average:
arithmetic average of indicators=
(C. + C. + C. + ···)
n
() we categorised countries on an ordinal scale of
levels – on the basis of the scores of the indices. These
five levels are similar to the capacity levels used to assess
countries using SPAR (panel ).,

Results
We analysed the  SPAR submissions of  countries.
 SPAR data does not exist for  State Parties and
therefore could not be included as part of this study.
 (%) of  countries included were found to have an
overall detection capacity at level  or .  (%) countries
had levels  or  capacities to prevent and  (%) countires
had levels  or  capacities to respond, many of which
are classified as low-income and lower-middle-income
countries by the World Bank.  (%) countries had
level  or  capacities to prevent, and  (%) countries
had level  or  capacities to respond.  (%) countries
had a level  or  enabling function.
 (%) countries had prevent,  (%) had detect,
 (%) had respond,  (%) had enabling function,
www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 

Articles

Panel : Selected indicators and rationale for their use
Capacity to prevent
C.—collaborative effort on activities to address zoonoses
Evidence suggesting a link to zoonosis.,

C.—case management capacity for IHR relevant hazards
Effective response to outbreaks and other health emergencies
depends on case management.

C.—multisectoral collaboration mechanism for food safety events
Infectious disease outbreaks can be brought about by gaps in
food safety.,

C.—capacity for infection prevention and control and chemical
and radiation decontamination
Capacity for infection prevention and control is needed for
effective case management and infection control.

C.—capacity for infection prevention and control and chemical
and radiation decontamination
Infection prevention and control at the community and healthcare facility level is key for prevention, control and containment
of the infection.
C.—capacity for emergency risk communications
Reaching out to communities at the local, national, and global
levels are essential for prevention, detection, and control of the
infection.
C.—core capacity requirements at all times for designated
airports, ports and ground crossing
Core capacities to prevent, detect, and respond at the points of
entry are crucial for prevention and control of infectious
disease outbreaks.
Capacity to detect
C.—specimen referral and transport system; C.—access to
laboratory testing capacity for priority diseases
Not all countries will have capacity to test specimens.
Therefore, countries should have a system of specimen referral,
transportation, and testing of suspected cases.
C.—early warning function: indicator-based and event-based
surveillance
Reporting from communities, health-care facilities, and points
of entry are crucial for prevention and detection of infectious
disease outbreaks.
C.—mechanism for event management (verification, risk
assessment, analysis investigation)
Capacity for verification, risk assessment, and analysis
investigation is crucial for the prevention, detection,
and control of infectious disease outbreaks.
Capacity to respond
C.—planning for emergency preparedness and response mechanism
Response capacity depends on availability of preparedness and
response plans and mechanisms and regular testing for
functionality and updating them to address gaps.
C.—management of health emergency response operations
Any public health events require incident management
systems to be followed. Therefore, the capacity to respond
effectively to an outbreak depends on strong capacity of
emergency operations.
C.—emergency resource mobilisation
During response, all types of resources must be mobilised in a
timely manner (funds, human resources, and logistics).

www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 	

C.—effective public health response at points of entry
Any suspected case detected at points of entry needs to be
managed effectively, otherwise the risk of transmission across
borders remains high.
Enabling function index
C.—financing mechanism and funds for timely response to public
health emergencies
Availability and accessibility of financing mechanisms is
essential for prevention, detection, and control of infectious
disease outbreaks.
C.—multisectoral IHR coordination mechanisms
Multisectoral coordination and action is needed to manage
public health events including infectious disease outbreaks.
C.—human resources for the implementation of IHR capacities
During emergencies, different skillsets, surge capacity, and
timely mobilisation of health-care workers are needed to
prevent, detect, and control events.
C.—emergency resource mobilisation
During response, all types of resources must be mobilised to
manage events.
C.—access to essential health services
Access to the essential health services are needed to prevent,
detect, and control infectious disease outbreaks. Continuity
of essential health services must be ensured during
emergencies.
Operational readiness
C.; C.; C.; C.; C.; C.; C.; C.; C.; C.; C.;
C.; C.; C.; C.; C.; C.; and C.
These  indicators of the SPAR tool have been used to
develop an index for operational readiness. The index helps to
assess the status of national readiness capacities across each
WHO region. A full description of these indicators is given in the
appendix. According to WHO, high-level operational readiness
to respond to emergencies will allow a timely, effective,
and efficient response. Achieving readiness is a continuous
process of establishing, strengthening, and maintaining a
multisectoral response infrastructure that can be applied at all
levels, which follows an all-hazard approach, and which focuses
on the highest priority risks. Operational readiness builds on
existing capacities to design and set up specialised
arrangements and services for an emergency response.

See Online for appendix

IHR=International Health Regulations.



Articles

 (%) countries’ capacities were at level , indicating
moderate develop­ment. Only ten (%) countries had level
 capacities, and none at level , for the detection of an
infectious disease outbreak.

Panel : Criteria and definitions for levels in this study
Level : ≤%
Very little functional capacity is in place to prevent and
control the risk or event.

Respond capacity

Level : ≤%
Little functional capacity available on an ad-hoc basis with
the support of external resources.

 (%) countries had low capacities to respond to a
public health event, including an infectious disease
outbreak ( [%] at level  and  [%] at level ;
figure ).  (%) countries were at a level  capacity to
respond, and  (%) countries had high capacities to
respond ( [%] at level  and  [%] at level ).

Level : ≤%
The country is functionally capable at the national level;
however, effectiveness is low at the subnational levels.
Level : ≤%
The country is functionally capable of dealing with various
events at the national and subnational levels.

Enabling function
 (%) countries were categorised in the lowest
levels (seven [%] at level  and  [%] at level ) for
enabling function.  (%) countries ( [%] at
level  and  [%] at level ) had the highest levels of
resources and the highest levels of collaboration or
coordination to prevent, detect, and respond to an event.
 (%) countries were at level .

Level : >%
The country’s functional capacity is well advanced and
sustainable at all levels of health systems.

Capacities to prevent, detect, respond, enabling
function, and operational readiness (n=)
Level 


Operational readiness
Enabling function



Respond



Detect



Prevent




Level 



Level 

Level 





















 (%) countries had low operational readiness
capacities (two [%] at level  and  [%] at level ;
figure ).  (%) countries were operationally ready to
prevent, detect, and control an event ( [%] at level 
and  [%] at level ).  (%) countries’ operational
readiness capacities were at level .








Operational readiness capacity
Level 




Operational readiness capacity by WHO regions






Number of countries

Figure : Number of countries according to capacities to prevent, detect, respond, enabling function,
and operational readiness
Level  represents the lowest capacity and level  the highest.

and  (%) had operational readiness capacities at
level .  (%) countries had enabling functions at
levels  or  and require external support.  (%)
countries had operational readiness capacities at levels 
and , and  (%) had good operational readiness
( [%] at level  and  [%] at level ).

Prevention capacity
 (%) countries had a low capacity to prevent a public
health event, including an infectious disease outbreak
(eight [%] at level  and  [%] at level ; figure ).
 [%] countries had a robust prevention capacity
( [%] at level  and  [%] at level ) and  (%) of
countries had moderate preven­tion capacities (level ).

Detection capacity
 (%) countries had robust detection capacities
( [%] at level  and  [%] at level ; figure ).
	

Wide variation exists in the capacity for operational
readiness across regions (figure ).  (%) of  the
countries in the WHO African Region and five (%) of
 countries in the WHO Western Pacific Region had low
capacities for operational readiness. Across all regions,
 (%) of  countries had operational readiness
capaci­ties at level  ( [%]) and level  ( [%]). No
countries were at level  for operational readiness in
the African and South-East Asia regions.  (%) of all
countries had an operational readiness capacity at level .

Discussion
We found that countries varied widely in terms of their
capacity to prevent, detect, and control outbreaks, with
about half the countries reporting operational readiness
capacities to respond to public health emergencies. We
used the  SPAR data, which is self-reported by
countries to represent their capacity levels; the data are
not independently verified. The inclusion of additional
data sources from external IHR monitoring and assess­
ment exercises was excluded from this study because
countries are assessed across multiple years. For
instance, over  countries have implemented joint
external evaluations to date, which have been carried out
between  and . The SPAR data that we used
reflects the capacity of countries in  only. Although
www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 

Articles

www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 	

Operational readiness index (n=)
Level 
WPR



EUR



EMR



Level 

Level 










SEAR
WHO regions

the use of independently verified data would be useful
(eg, external assessments such as joint external evalu­
ations) for a review of this nature, this limitation is
minimised by the fact that SPAR data has been shown
to correlate strongly with externally evaluated data such
as the Joint External Evaluation results.
Several factors affect the emergence and spread of an
infectious disease outbreak within countries and between
regions, including the strength of IHR capacities at the
national and subnational levels, adherence to infec­
tion prevention and control measures, climate-related
pressures, and the density of populations.,, When an
outbreak is caused by an airborne pathogen, population
density or crowding is known to directly affect spread of
infection. Analysis of other risk variables associated with
tackling an infectious disease outbreak and managing
health emergencies would benefit understanding of
existing country capacities, including vulnerabilities due
to socioeconomic conditions, comorbid conditions, and
lack of health infrastructure, which we did not take into
account.
The information and data from these exercises should
be analysed to build and inform readiness and response
plans for preventing and controlling health emergencies
including the outbreak of COVID-. The analyses of the
operational readiness index have been used to support
the development of a draft WHO strategic preparedness
and response plan for COVID-. These findings must
be triangulated with the latest risk assessments available
for COVID- and other assessments such as Joint
External Evaluations, after-action reviews, simulation
exercises, and others to understand the capacity level of
countries and to implement priority actions at the
national and subnational levels., The WHO Secretariat
is working on the development of a preparedness
dashboard to provide real-time information that is based
on these capacity assessments. Another limitation is
related to the method being based on a deterministic
approach; therefore, proportionate or inverse interactions
among variables could not be shown.
An effective way of managing airborne infections is
applying evidence-based public health prevention strat­
egies.,, This method includes scaling up public
awareness of behaviours such as hand hygiene and
respiratory etiquette, communicating and engaging with
local communities about the risks of the outbreak, and
putting in place effective public health response
measures.,, National points of entry should also have
the capacity to prevent, detect, and respond to potential
threats in line with the IHR. Many countries have low
capacities for preventing the occurrence and spread of
outbreaks, such as measles, influenza, Ebola virus.,
Therefore, enhancing national preparedness capacities
in line with the gaps identified in this study should
incorporate action to strengthen points of entry.
Many countries have made substantial progress in
developing effective levels of disease detection, which

Level 

Level 















AMR



AFR























Number of countries

Figure : Operational readiness index by WHO regions
Level  represents the lowest capacity and level  the highest. WPR=Western Pacific region. SEAR=South-East Asia
region. EUR=European region. EMR=Eastern Mediterranean region. AMR=Region of the Americas. AFR=African
region.

involves strengthening surveillance and laboratory capaci­
ties. The application of lessons learned from previous
infectious disease emergencies including the  SARSCoV,  HN influenza pandemic, MERS-CoV, Ebola
virus, and Zika virus outbreaks, have helped to strengthen
countries’ capacities to effectively detect and verify suspect
cases.,,, The early detection of COVID- in China
and the development of laboratory reagents for testing
and genetically sequencing the novel virus are key steps
that have supported the early response. We showed that
% of countries have robust detection capacities in
place, which will enable early detection and verification of
potential outbreaks when they occur.
A country’s response capacity depends on the strength of
its emergency preparedness and the regular testing and
updating of national plans and capacities. An effec­tive
response to an outbreak depends not only on the availability
of adequate human resources and financing, but also on
the ability to manage emergency logistics (including the
handling of supply chains for essential products that are
required during an emergency). Our findings show that
many countries need support to achieve these capacities
and increased support should be provided as a global
priority action to strengthen health security. Our findings
on operational readiness capacities and enabling function,
which are low in many low-resource countries, underline
the importance of increasing investments in scaling up
IHR capacities, as described in the  annual report of
the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board.
Another challenge underpinning low national prepared­
ness capacities is insufficient investment in human capital
and poor continuity planning.,, The world needs to
increase investment in anthropologists, data scientists,
communication specialist, educationists, and economists,
who are all essential in providing necessary support for the
control of infectious disease outbreaks.,, The important
role these specialists play in responding to outbreaks,


Articles

including Ebola virus, MERS-CoV, cholera, and measles
are well documented, and a key lesson from these public
health emergencies has been to ensure that these skillsets
are developed further. Our data reinforce this notion,
given the low capacities that many countries have to
prevent and respond to health emergencies and infectious
disease outbreaks effectively.
In the past  years, multisectoral coordination and
collabo­
ration for health security strengthening has
improved substantially. This coordination and collabo­
ration is reinforced by the introduction of voluntary IHR
external evaluation processes, including Joint External
Evaluations, which have successfully brought multiple
sectors together around common plans for national
preparedness capacity building. However, we showed that
half of the countries analysed have low enabling functions,
which means that coordination and collaboration have
been insufficient. The COVID- outbreak requires a
robust mechanism of collaboration and coordination at the
global, national, and subnational levels to prevent, detect,
and respond effectively.
The availability of essential health services at the com­
munity level is highly important for the ability of countries
to minimise potential health emergencies during the
earliest stages. Access to essential health services is one of
the key indicators that contributes to the indices of enabling
function and operational readiness. When an outbreak
occurs, national health systems should be strong enough to
be able to ensure the continued delivery of essential healthcare services, including immunisation and maternal health
services. Many countries, especially those that are low
resource, have insufficient access to essential health
services. Expanding access to essential health services in
such countries would support the achievement of effective
operational readiness, which is insufficient for many
countries, as shown in our analysis.
According to WHO, operational readiness for emergen­
cies will allow a timely, effective, and efficient response.
Achieving operational readiness is a continuous process of
establishing, strengthening, and maintaining a multi­
sectoral response infrastructure that can be applied at
all levels, which follows an all-hazard approach, and
which focuses on the highest priority risks. Our analysis
shows that more than % of countries analysed had the
highest levels of operational readiness capacities; however,
findings must be integrated with findings from local
risk assessments to fully understand national readiness
capacities in relation to COVID-.
The findings of our analysis are similar to those of
other publications that have assessed health security
capacities., A study on the assessments of health
security capacities in the African Region also found similar
variances in the capacity of countries. Using an analysis of
results of joint external evaluations, most of the countries
of the African Region have been shown to have national
capacity levels of between  and , and none have achieved
level . This variance in national capacities is similar to our
	

findings on the operational readiness index. A study of
systemic resilience based on one composite measure of
IHR core capacities to manage cross-border infectious
diseases showed that improvement in IHR capacities is
associated with a decrease of incidence of cross-border
infection in Europe. This level of capacity is also reflected
in our study, in which most of the countries of the
WHO European Region were level  or  as per the
operational readiness index. Some countries have
stronger capacities than others; however, all countries
should invest in build­
ing greater preparedness against
health emergencies.
Assessments of IHR () capacities reveal that
advances have been made since  in many countries to
better detect potential outbreaks of infectious diseases
early and test suspect cases rapidly—eg, the early detection
and verification of the novel coronavirus cases by
China and other countries. All countries are at risk of
COVID- and other outbreaks of infectious diseases, and
countries vary widely in terms of their capacity to prevent,
detect, and control outbreaks COVID- is not fully
understood, which can further aggravate the situation.
Therefore these findings should be combined with the
latest risk assessments that are available for COVID-
and other assessments to understand the existing
capacities. The WHO Secretariat is developing the
preparedness dash­
board (a data visualisation platform
that will include a query system) to provide real-time
information that is based on various capacity assessments.
Despite the gains made in understanding the pathogen,
many countries are underprepared to manage cases
within their borders. Investments in preparedness
urgently need to be scaled up to ensure that vulnerable
countries are operationally ready and capable to respond
to public health events such as the COVID- outbreak.
Many countries are struggling to sustain or develop their
national preparedness capacities, primarily because of a
lack of resources, competing national priorities, and a high
turnover of health-care workers. Only half of the countries
analysed in this study have the provision for adequate
resources for emer­gencies, and these countries are mostly
either high-income or middle-income countries. Urgent
action is needed to ensure that capacities are in place to
prevent and manage health emergencies. The outbreak of
COVID- is another opportunity to review the prepared­
ness of all countries and apply key recommendations from
other major public health emergencies to better protect the
world against future health emergencies.
Contributors
NK conceptualised the study, analysed the data, and drafted and finalised
the manuscript. SC contributed to the concept, draft, and finalising the
paper. AO and JX saw drafts and provided input. All authors approved
the final version of the manuscript.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Data sharing
The data are publicly available online.

www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 

Articles

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge all State Parties to the IHR for their timely collection and
submission of IHR data to WHO through the SPAR process. We want to
acknowledge colleagues from the WHO country offices, the WHO
regional offices, and WHO headquarters for support in gathering these
data with State Parties. We appreciate the support provided to WHO and
its member states by governments, international organisations, donors,
and partners in the implementation of the IHR. Finally, we would like to
thank Lynne Harrop and Christelle Paul Guillot for their valuable support.
Reference
	 Richman DD, Whitley RJ, Hayden FG. Clinical virology, th edn.
Washington: ASM Press, 
	 Huang C, Wang Y, Li X. Clinical features of patients infected with
 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet ; : –.
	 WHO. Novel coronavirus (-NCoV) situation report . Geneva:
World Health Organisation, Jan , . https://www.who.int/
docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/-sitrep--ncov.pdf?sfvrsn=ac_ (accessed Jan , ).
	 Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, et al. A novel coronavirus from patients
with pneumonia in China, . N Engl J Med ; : –.
	 WHO. Novel coronavirus (-NCoV) situation report . Geneva:
World Health Organization, Feb , . https://www.who.int/
docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/sitrep--covid-.pdf?sfvrsn=be_ (accessed Feb , ).
	 WHO. WHO Director-General’s statement on IHR Emergency
Committee on Novel Coronavirus (-nCoV). Geneva:
World Health Organization, Jan , . https://www.who.int/dg/
speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-statement-on-ihr-emergencycommittee-on-novel-coronavirus-(-ncov) (accessed Jan , ).
	 Perlman S. Another decade, another coronavirus. N Engl J Med
; : –.
	 Global Preparedness Monitoring Board. Annual report on global
preparedness for health emergencies. Geneva: World Health
Organization, . https://apps.who.int/gpmb/assets/annual_
report/GPMB_annualreport_.pdf (accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. International health regulations (IHR []). Geneva:
World Health Organization, . https://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/handle///-eng.
pdf?sequence= (accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. Prioritizing diseases for research and development in
emergency contexts. Geneva: World Health Organization, .
www.who.int/activities/prioritizing-diseases-for-research-anddevelopment-in-emergency-contexts (accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. IHR monitoring and evaluation framework. Geneva:
World Health Organization, . www.who.int/ihr/publications/
WHO-WHE-CPI-./en/ (accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. WHO benchmarks for international health regulations
(IHR) capacities. Geneva: World Health Organization, .
www.who.int/ihr/publications//en/ (accessed
Jan , ).
	 WHO. State party self-assessment annual reporting tool. Geneva:
World Health Organization, Nov , . http://www.who.int/ihr/
publications/WHO-WHE-CPI-./en/ (accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. Global health observatory—international health regulations.
Geneva: World Health Organization, . https://www.who.int/
gho/ihr/en/ (accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. IHR States parties self-assessment annual reporting (SPAR).
Geneva: World Health Organization, . https://extranet.who.int/
sph/spar (accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. Infection prevention and control during health care when
novel coronavirus (NCoV) infection is suspected: interim guidance.
Geneva: World Health Organization, . https://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/handle///WHO--nCoV-IPC-v.eng.pdf (accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. Risk communication and community engagement readiness
and initial response for novel coronaviruses (NCoV). Jan .
Geneva: World Health Organization, . http://www.who.int/
publications-detail/risk-communication-and-communityengagement-readiness-and-initial-response-for-novelcoronaviruses-(-ncov) (accessed Jan , ).
	 Kandel N. Is there a business continuity plan for emergencies like
an Ebola outbreak or other pandemics? J Bus Contin Emer Plan
; : –.

www.thelancet.com Vol  March , 	

	 WHO. Strategic framework for emergency preparedness. Geneva:
World Health Organization, . https://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/handle///-eng.
pdf?sequence=&isAllowed=y (accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. IHR country capacity assessment, monitoring, evaluation
and planning update. Geneva: World Health Organisation.
https://extranet.who.int/sph/docs/file/ (accessed Feb , ).
	 Kandel N, Chungong S, Mahjour J. Improvement in annual
reporting of self-assessments to the International Health
Regulations (). Weekly epidemiological record. Geneva:
World Health Organization, May , . https://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/handle///WERmay-iii-vii-eng-fre.
pdf (accessed Jan , ).
	 Tellier R., Li Y., Cowling BJ, et al. Recognition of aerosol
transmission of infectious agents: a commentary. BMC Infect Dis
; : .
	 WHO.  novel coronavirus (-nCoV): strategic preparedness
and response plan. Geneva: World Health Organization, .
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/srp.pdf (accessed Feb , ).
	 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. Key concept:
deterministic and probabilistic risk. https://www.preventionweb.
net/risk/deterministic-probabilistic-risk (accessed Jan , ).
	 Biezen R, Grando D, Mazza D, et al. Visibility and transmission:
complexities around promoting hand hygiene in young
children—a qualitative review. BMC Public Health ; : .
	 WHO. Managing epidemics: key facts about major deadly diseases.
Geneva: World Health Organization, . https://www.who.int/
emergencies/diseases/managing-epidemics-interactive.pdf
(accessed Jan , ).
	 Benecke O, DeYoung SE. Anti-vaccine decision-making and
measles resurgence in the United States. Glob Pediatr Health ;
: X.
	 Tam T. Fifteen years post-SARS: key milestones in Canada’s public
health emergency response. Can Commun Dis Rep ; : –.
	 WHO. Laboratory diagnostics for novel coronavirus. Geneva:
World Health Organization, . http://www.who.int/healthtopics/coronavirus/laboratory-diagnostics-for-novel-coronavirus
(accessed Jan , ).
	 WHO. Thematic paper on the status of country preparedness
capacities. Geneva: World Health Organization, .
http://apps.who.int/gpmb/assets/thematic_papers/tr-.pdf
(accessed Jan , ).
	 Faas AJ, Barriosv RE. Applied anthropology of risk, , and disasters.
Human Organization ; : –.
	 Lim SS, Updike RL, Kaldjian AS, et al. Measuring human capital:
a systematic analysis of  countries and territories, –.
Lancet ; : –.
	 Gesesew HA, Tebeje B, Alemseged F, Beyene W. Health workforce
acquisition, retention and turnover in southwest Ethiopian health
institutions. Ethiop J Health Sci ; : –.
	 Kandel N, Sreedharan R, Chungong S, et al. Joint external
evaluation process: bringing multiple sectors together for global
health security. Lancet Glob Health ; : e–.
	 WHO. World Bank and WHO: half of the world lack access to
essential health services,  million still pushed intro extreme
poverty because of health expenses. Tokyo: World Health
Organization, Dec , . https://www.who.int/news-room/
detail/---world-bank-and-who-half-the-world-lacks-access-toessential-health-services--million-still-pushed-into-extremepoverty-because-of-health-expenses (accessed Feb , ).
	 Talisuna A, Yahaya AA, Rajatonirina SC, et al. Joint external
evaluation of the International Health Regulation () capacities:
current status and lessons learnt in the WHO African region.
BMJ Glob Health ; : e.
	 Semenza JC, Sewe MO, Lindgren E, et al. Systemic resilience to
cross-border infectious disease threat events in Europe.
Transbound Emerg Dis ; : –.
	 Montgomery JM, Woolverton A, Hedges S, et al. Ten years of global
disease detection and counting: program accomplishments and
lessons learned in building global health security.
BMC Public Health ; : .



