TECHNICAL REPORT

Considerations relating to social
distancing measures in response to
COVID-19 – second update
23 March 2020
What is new in this update




Additional information about workplace closures
Discussion of the term ‘social distancing’ vis-à-vis the practice of ‘physical distancing’
Discussion of the importance of promoting solidarity and mutual community support when social distancing
measures are implemented

Scope of this document
This document aims to support public health preparedness planning and response activities based upon social
distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of COVID-19.
Social distancing is an action taken to minimise contact with other individuals; social distancing measures comprise
one category of non-pharmaceutical countermeasures (NPCs)1 aimed at reducing disease transmission and thereby
also reducing pressure on health services [1, 2].
This document builds upon and supports existing ECDC documents, including guidelines for the use of nonpharmaceutical measures to delay and mitigate the impact of 2019-nCoV [2], a rapid risk assessment: outbreak of
novel coronavirus disease – sixth update [4a], a technical report on the use of evidence in decision-making during
public health emergencies [5], and a guidance document on community engagement for public health events
caused by communicable disease threats in the EU/EEA [15].

1

Other NPCs include personal protective measures (hand and respiratory hygiene, cough etiquette, and use of respirators or
facemasks) and environmental measures (routine cleaning of frequently used surfaces, clothes and objects; minimising the
sharing of objects; and ensuring appropriate ventilation.)

Erratum. On 26 March 2020, the first bullet point in Table 1 on page 3 was revised. The version of this document initially
published stated: ‘Confirmed or suspected cases of COVID19 are isolated [...] or recommended to self-isolate at home (mild
cases).’ This has now been amended to ensure consistency with other ECDC publications.
Suggested citation: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Considerations relating to social distancing measures in
response to COVID-19 – second update. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020.
© European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, 2020.

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

Target audience
Public health authorities in the EU/EEA Member States and the United Kingdom.

Key points





Social distancing aims, through a variety of means, to minimise physical contact between individuals and
thereby to reduce the possibility for new infections.
Decisions on when and how to implement social distancing measures should always be informed by
evidence, but they will very rarely be purely evidence based. Social and political considerations will also
need to be taken into account.
The detection of COVID-19 cases and/or deaths outside of known chains of transmission is a strong signal
that social distancing measures, such as closures of workplaces/schools, cancellations of mass gatherings,
and the quarantine of affected areas, should be considered.
The early, decisive, rapid, coordinated and comprehensive implementation of measures, closures and
quarantines is likely to be more effective in slowing the spread of the virus than a delayed implementation.

Background
With the rapidly escalating COVID-19 pandemic, governments in all countries have been urged by WHO to regard
control of the disease as a ‘top priority’ [3]; ECDC has made a similar call for EU/EEA Member States [4, 4a]. This
short guide discusses various aspects of the implementation of social distancing measures, including the decisionmaking process and some of the socio-economic effects that they may bring about.

Decision-making for social distancing
measures
The COVID-19 pandemic is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation for which social distancing measures may be
justified and implemented as a core component of the response. Public health authorities should ensure that
decision makers are aware of, and understand, the current scientific uncertainties related to the virus [5]. These
uncertainties include, among other issues:







The precise mode(s) of transmission of the virus, and the possibility of aerosol transmission
How long someone needs to be exposed in order to be infected
The minimum infectious dose/number of infectious viral particles needed to initiate infection
The degree of infectivity prior to onset of symptoms, and how long a person is infectious after recovery
Whether seasonality will affect transmission
Immune responses in humans and duration of immunity.

Mathematical modelling of the effects of social distancing interventions can support decision-making, based on the
local contact patterns and known or assumed parameters of infectiousness, incubation time and duration of
immunity [30].
Public health authorities should recognise that extra-scientific factors (e.g. feasibility of implementing scientific
advice, time pressure, socio-political factors, institutional factors, economic interests, pressure from neighbouring
countries etc.) are inherent to the decision-making process. These factors will also influence the implementation of
any proposed response measures [1, 5]. Decisions should therefore always be evidence informed, but they will
very rarely be purely evidence based.
Lessons identified from previous influenza pandemics (e.g. from 1918, 1957, 1968, 2009), annual seasonal
influenza epidemics, and from the SARS outbreak in 2003 may be taken into account in the decision-making and
implementation process [31, 32]. However, it is important to bear in mind that COVID-19 is a new disease with its
own, as yet incompletely understood, properties.

Objectives of social distancing measures
The term ‘social distancing’ refers to efforts that aim, through a variety of means, to decrease or interrupt
transmission of COVID-19 in a population (sub-)group by minimising physical contact between potentially infected
individuals and healthy individuals, or between population groups with high rates of transmission and population
groups with no or a low level of transmission. Community-level social distancing measures are needed in parallel

2

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

with containment efforts (e.g. contact tracing [33]) whenever it becomes clear that containment alone is no longer
sufficient as a means of delaying the peak of the epidemic, decreasing the peak magnitude to protect healthcare
capacity, or protecting vulnerable groups at risk of severe outcomes (Figure 1). There are several different types of
social distancing measures (Table 1), and these can be categorised in ‘layers’, in ascending order of scale. Each
progressive layer of measures includes all measures from the previous layers.
It is important to note that the term ‘social distancing’ focuses on reducing physical contact as a means of
interrupting transmission, but while reduction of social contact may be an outcome of that, it is not a specific aim.
Indeed, the success of social distancing measures that are implemented over an extended period may depend on
ensuring that people maintain social contact – from a distance – with friends, family and colleagues. Internetbased communications are therefore a key tool for ensuring a successful social distancing strategy.
Figure 1. Illustration of the objectives of social distancing measures to reduce and delay the peak of
the epidemic and protect healthcare capacity

Table 1: Description of social distancing measures and their rationale, at individual and group level
Social distancing measure

Description

Rationale

Individual social distancing
Isolation2 of cases

 Confirmed or suspected cases of
COVID19 are isolated, meaning either
hospitalised (usually for moderate or
severe cases) to provide care, or managed
in dedicated isolation facilities or at home
(mild cases)
 In a situation of widespread community
transmission, a blanket recommendation
for individuals with symptoms to stay home
may be given
 Isolation of cases can be voluntary or
mandatory

 Separating sick from healthy persons to avoid
transmission

Quarantine2 of contacts

 Healthy person(s) who have had a high- or
low-risk contact with a confirmed COVID19 case, according to the contact
investigation
 Quarantine of cases can be voluntary or
mandatory2

 Usually recommended to self-quarantine in a safe
area or at home, and self-monitor for appearance
of COVID-19-compatible symptoms; if symptoms
are detected, a test may be carried out promptly
 Separation from other healthy persons to avoid
transmission if disease develops, even during
asymptomatic or subclinical phases of the disease

2

In the context of public health, confirmed or suspected patients of an infectious disease (‘cases’) are isolated while their
contacts (depending on the epidemiology of the disease), who are in general healthy persons, are quarantined. The word
quarantine has an inherent enforcement meaning. Sometimes ‘voluntary self-isolation’, or even ‘voluntary quarantine’, or ‘selfquarantine’ are used to infer that persons comply voluntarily to public health recommendations.

3

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

Social distancing measure
Stay-at-home
recommendations

Description

Rationale

 Blanket recommendation for the public to
stay at home and avoid mass gatherings
and close contacts with people, especially
known high-risk groups

 Recommendations for voluntary social distancing
of persons, particularly the high-risk groups, in
order to reduce transmission, avoid increased
morbidity, and thereby decrease the pressure to
the health system

Social distancing affecting multiple persons
Closure of educational
institutions

 Schools (including day care centres,
kindergartens, primary and secondary
schools)
 Closure of higher educational institutions
(including universities, research institutes,
etc.)

 Preventing contact among children is a known
prevention measure in influenza outbreaks and
pandemics
 Universities and other educational institutions are
also areas where large numbers of people
congregate in confined spaces
 In studies of influenza outbreaks, both measures
usually have the biggest effect when applied early
in the transmission phase and when they last until
the circulation of the pathogen decreases (i.e. after
several weeks) [34]
 Need to also prevent meeting/gathering of youths
outside school in order to ensure effectiveness

Workplace closures

 Closure of offices, factories, retail outlets,
agricultural production, construction,
restaurants, cafes/bars, sports clubs,
haulage/transport etc.
 Can include: flexible working
schedules/shifts for employees;
opportunities for distance
working/teleworking; encouraging physical
distancing measures within the workspace;
increased use of email and
teleconferences to reduce close contacts;
reduced contact between employees and
customers; reduced contact between
employees; adoption of flexible leave
policies; and promoting the use of other
personal protective and environmental
countermeasures

 The aim is to avoid transmission among mediumto-large numbers of people in confined spaces
over extended periods
 Depending on the proximity of people working in
different workplace settings as well as the rate and
nature of their interactions, different individuals and
groups will be at higher risk of infection than
others. Closures can therefore be targeted to these
areas.

Measures for special
populations

Measures to limit outside visitors and limit the
contact between the inmates/patients in
confined settings, such as:
 Long-term care facilities, either for the
elderly or persons with special needs
 Psychiatric institutions
 Homeless shelters
 Prisons

 These institutions house a large percent of people
in high-risk groups for severe disease and poor
outcome, are often densely populated, and
outbreaks of COVID-19 can lead to significant
morbidity and mortality
 Measures should be applied early in the outbreak
and be continued until the circulation of COVID-19
decreases in the community

Mass gathering cancellations

 Cultural events (theatres, cinemas,
concerts, etc.)
 Sporting events (football, indoor and
outdoor athletic games, marathon runs
etc.)
 Festivals, faith-based events
 Conferences, meetings, trade fairs, etc.

 To avoid transmission among large numbers of
people in confined spaces
 For some events – even though they may be
conducted outdoors (e.g. football matches) –
attendees may be in close contact on public
transportation, at the entrance and exit, etc.

Cordon sanitaire/mandatory
quarantine of a building or
residential area(s)

 Refers to the quarantine and closing off of
a building or whole residential area (city,
region, etc.)

 Limiting the contact between high-incidence areas
and those with no or low levels of transmission
 This measure implies that the measures above
(e.g. school and higher education closures,
cancellations of mass gatherings) are also
implemented in order to maximise social distancing
within the cordon sanitaire

4

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

When to initiate social distancing measures
and exit strategies
There is uncertainty over the effectiveness of most social distancing measures as a means of controlling COVID-19.
However, due to the relatively high transmissibility of the virus, the impact of such measures on the peak
magnitude of the epidemic and the potential delay of the peak is likely to depend on how early the measures are
taken in the context of the local epidemiological situation. In addition, layering of multiple measures is likely to
increase the composite effectiveness of individual measures.
Observational and modelling evidence from past pandemics (e.g. influenza pandemics) and from the experiences
with COVID-19 in China indicates that the early, decisive, rapid, coordinated and comprehensive implementation of
social distancing measures are likely to be more effective in slowing the spread of the virus than delayed actions
[6-8]: it is estimated that if a range of non-pharmaceutical interventions, including social distancing, had been
conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier in China, the number of COVID-19 cases could have been
reduced by 66%, 86%, and 95%, respectively, while also significantly reducing the number of affected areas [9].
There is no one-size-fits-all method of deciding on the best time to enact social distancing measures that involve
closures, cancellations or quarantine of entire affected areas. In an epidemiological situation between scenario 3
(localised outbreaks that start to merge, becoming indistinct) and scenario 4 (widespread sustained transmission of
COVID-19) [4], the detection of COVID-19 cases and/or deaths outside of known chains of transmission provides a
signal that such social distancing measures should be implemented. In addition, data support the simultaneous
implementation of several layers of social distancing at once, rather than one by one [7]. For example, if schools
are closed but workplaces remain open, parents and caregivers may need to ask grandparents to take care of their
(possibly infected) children while they continue working. This could lead directly to increased transmission to
individuals who are at high risk of severe disease.
In the meantime, as a means of facilitating public acceptance of social distancing measures, it is important that an
anticipated end date is established and communicated as soon as possible. It should also be made clear to the
population that a) the measures could be extended if circumstances require it, and that b) some measures may be
removed or reduced while others remain in place. In addition, plans should be drawn up and communicated to the
public that there is the possibility of re-imposing large-scale social distancing measures if there is a resurgence of
transmission following the lifting of measures. ECDC is currently working on an analysis of possible exit strategies
(including timing). The results will be included in the next edition of this document.
Note that in the absence of mass vaccination programmes, the development of sufficient levels of immunity in the
population through natural infection (‘herd immunity’) is the only way to eventually decrease transmission
opportunities in the community. Ultimately, when ‘herd immunity’ is sufficient, social distancing measures become
obsolete.

Considerations when implementing social
distancing measures
Some of the generic challenges authorities will face when implementing social distance measures are presented
below; details of the specific measures are given in Table 2 below.

Social and political factors
Every EU/EEA country has a specific social, political and constitutional context. What may be acceptable and
feasible in one setting may not be in another. Societal norms and values underpinning freedom of movement and
travel will need to be weighed against precautionary principles and the public acceptance of risks [10]. It is
important to consider, anticipate and plan for mitigation, while keeping in mind the considerable public reaction
that social distancing measures may cause. There is no one-size-fits-all approach for implementation of social
distancing measures.

5

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

Human rights and proportionality of response
Restrictive public health measures must always respect existing national legislation, as well as international legal
and ethical principles, such as the UN Siracusa Principles [11] and the International Health Regulations, Article 3
[12]. On this basis, the following conditions should be met:
‘Public necessity, demonstrated effectiveness and scientific rationale, proportionality and least infringement,
reciprocity, justice and fairness’ [13].
It is important, for example, that people should not be quarantined to protect the wider population if they
themselves are then isolated in a high-transmission setting. Furthermore, quarantine should not differentiate
between social or economic groups in a population [14].

Risk communication
A comprehensive risk communication strategy should be developed. It should, among other things, present to the
public the rationale and justification behind the implemented social distancing measures. In addition to informing
the population about mandated measures, a key component of this should be to encourage people to take action
at a personal level as a means of protecting themselves. Different audiences should be targeted (for example
through minority languages). A monitoring system should also be put in place to observe public perceptions and
opinions of both the outbreak and the response to the outbreak [15].

Countering stigma
Evidence from previous infectious disease epidemics indicates that people and/or groups who have been subjected
to quarantine or self-isolation – even if not infected themselves – may be stigmatised [16], which can undermine
their capacity to adhere to the public health measures in place and may have longer-term social implications [17].
It is important for the authorities to proactively address potential stigma by promoting a sense of solidarity in the
population: everyone is to some extent at risk, and that ‘we are all in this together’ [18].

Support for people and communities subjected to social
distancing measures
To facilitate adherence to, and implementation of, social isolation measures, a support system should be prepared
and communicated to ensure the continued provision of essential services and supplies (e.g. food, medication and
access to healthcare) to people and communities subjected to social distancing measures [19, 20]. Consideration
should also be given to the potential effects of the social distancing measures on mental health of the affected
individuals [17, 19]. Encouraging contact with friends, family and other networks via internet-based
communications systems, social media and phone is an important means of promoting mental well-being. The
benefits of encouraging people to engage in physical activity – whether in their homes or, alone, outside – should
also be stressed, as should advice to eat healthy, well-balanced meals; drink enough water; and try to avoid
smoking, alcohol and drugs [35].

Special support for vulnerable groups
Vulnerable individuals – for example the elderly, those with underlying health conditions, disabled people, people
with mental health problems, homeless people, and undocumented migrants – will require extra support [4a].
Authorities may want to consider coordinating with, and supporting, civil society and religious groups that already
work with these populations [15].

Promoting solidarity and mutual community support
There is anecdotal evidence from several countries where rigorous quarantine measures have been implemented of
communities spontaneously engaging in shows of mutual support. These have included singing together and
applauding health workers from the balconies of apartment buildings; hanging banners with encouraging messages
(e.g. ‘Andrà tutto bene’ in Italy, which translates as ‘Everything will be alright’); donations of food and face masks;
and people reaching out to elderly or otherwise vulnerable neighbours to make sure that they feel supported and
remembered. From the business community, there have also been offers from the producers of alcoholic drinks to
turn their focus and activities towards the provision of hand sanitiser, which is in short supply in many settings.
Official acknowledgment and promotion of such gestures of solidarity and mutual community support may facilitate
stronger adherence to these very challenging measures for the population.

6

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

Financial compensation for lost income and employment
Restrictive social distancing measures carry with them short- and possibly medium-term financial burdens [1].
Families, communities and businesses will be affected, with low-wage and gig-economy (zero-hour contracts)
workers facing particular challenges. Financial compensation for losses incurred may be seen as an essential
component of the wider preventive strategy because it may facilitate adherence to the prescribed public health
measures [22].

Ensuring business continuity
Business continuity management is the process by which an organisation ensures that its most critical activities and
processes are operational regardless of incidents or disruptions. Some business continuity measures, such as
teleworking, may also reduce transmission of the virus [23]. Business continuity should be ensured for those
essential services for which the societal consequences of disruption would be high (e.g. law enforcement,
healthcare, fire services, long-term care facilities, pharmacies, grocery shops, internet providers, prisons, and the
utilities (water, gas, electricity) sector). Business continuity support should also be provided to non-critical and
smaller businesses, which may be more prone to failure [24].

Process and impact evaluation
The epidemiological and social effects of mandated social distancing measures should be monitored throughout the
period of enforcement and should be adapted accordingly in real time. Once the measures have been lifted, it will
be important to conduct a systematic, comprehensive post-event evaluation in each setting in order to identify
lessons and thereby inform future practice, for example in the event of a resurgence of the epidemic [1, 15].
Table 2. Overview of implementation, stakeholders, considerations and potential barriers per type of
social distancing measure to be implemented
Social distancing measure
Individual social distancing
Isolation of cases
Quarantine of contacts
Stay-at-home
recommendations

Stakeholders (in addition to
public health authorities)
Authorities at local and/or national
levels responsible for:
 Internal affairs
 Judicial system and law
enforcement bodies

7

Considerations and potential barriers
 In the phase of widespread transmission, confirmed
COVID-19 cases with mild symptoms, or people with
symptoms consistent with COVID-19, may be requested
to self-isolate at home
 Mandatory isolation of cases and/or and quarantine of
their contacts should be considered if persons do not
comply with voluntary isolation or self-quarantine
 Teleworking may not be an option for all quarantined
cases, and personal financial losses may occur
 Essential services (healthcare, schools, utilities, etc.) may
be severely affected if identified cases and/or contacts
include key workers
 Environmental cleaning should be conducted along with
the use of other personal protective measures (hand
hygiene and respiratory etiquette) while on self-isolation
 Face masks should be used at all times by symptomatic,
ill people when in contact with other people in the
household in order to avoid infecting them

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

Stakeholders (in addition to
public health authorities)
Social distancing affecting multiple persons
Closure of educational
Ministries/authorities at local
institutions:
and/or national levels
 Schools (including day care responsible for:
centres, kindergartens,
 Health
primary and secondary
 Education
schools) [25]
 Internal affairs
 Higher education
 Regional education
institutions closure
authorities
(universities, research
 Foreign affairs
institutes, academic
 Deans/boards of public and
institutes, etc.)
private universities
 Boards of research
institutions
 Parent associations
 Student associations
Social distancing measure

Workplace closures:
 Offices
 Factories
 Retail Outlets
 Construction
 Restaurants, cafes/bars
 Sports clubs
 Haulage/transport








Considerations and potential barriers
Considerations for educational institutions
 Need to ensure continuity of education, but be aware of
unequal access to digital education
 Dropout rates may increase while schools and
universities are closed
 Social isolation because educational institutions are a
hub of social activity and human interaction
 Community and financial pressures to remain open
Schools
 Parents may miss work and will incur financial losses;
some may lose their jobs, which could disproportionately
affect one-parent households
 Adverse effect on health system because a significant
percentage of women work in the health sector and may
need to stay home to care for children
 Adverse effect on children’s nutrition because many rely
on meals provided at schools
Higher education
 Universities may need to cancel other mass gathering
events, e.g. conferences, project meetings, workshops,
etc., therefore incurring loss of funds
 Research trips and field work may need to be
postponed/cancelled, therefore incurring loss of funds
 Consider the needs of visiting students and teaching staff
from other countries who may have specific visas and/or
limited resources
 Special considerations and instructions are needed for
dormitories
 Research laboratories may need to maintain skeleton
staff to take care of long-lasting and/or costly
experiments, or feed/take care of laboratory animals
Considerations for workplaces
 Every effort should be made to ensure that essential
services are maintained (e.g. law enforcement,
healthcare, fire services, long-term care facilities,
pharmacies, grocery shops, internet providers, prisons,
and utilities such as water, gas and electricity), even if
they can only be manned by skeleton staff
 Wherever possible, employees should telework from
home and use videoconferencing tools for meetings
 Teleworking may not be an option in all cases, and
substantial personal financial losses and/or loss of
employment may occur
 Low-wage and gig-economy (zero-hour contracts)
workers may face particular challenges
 Some social distancing measures can be taken while
workplaces remain open (see Table 1)
 Financial compensation from the state for losses incurred
may be seen as an essential component of the wider
preventive strategy because it may facilitate adherence to
the prescribed public health measures

Trade Ministry
Finance Ministry
Emergency services
Employers
Business federations
Trade Unions

8

ECDC REPORT

Social distancing measure
Measures for special confined
populations, including:
 Long-term care facilities
[26]
 Psychiatric institutions
 Prisons, etc.

Mass gathering cancellation,
Including:
 Culture events (theatres,
cinemas, concerts, etc.)
 Sporting events (football,
indoor and outdoor athletic
games, marathons, etc.)
 Festivals
 Faith-based events
 Conferences
[27, 28]

Cordon sanitaire:
Mandatory quarantine of a
building or residential area(s)
[29]

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

Stakeholders (in addition to
public health authorities)
Ministries/ authorities at local
and/or national levels
responsible for:
 Health
 Interior affairs
 Judicial system and law
enforcement bodies

Considerations and potential barriers
Considerations for institutions
 Increased mental-health issues (e.g. depression) among
patients/inmates and further alienation of
patients/inmates from society
 Strict instructions to staff of such institutions saying that
they should not come to work if they experience
symptoms of respiratory illness and/or fever
 Virtual family visits can be organised if outside visitors are
not allowed for an extended period of time
 Need to ensure appropriate infection control within
facilities
Prisons
 Prisoner discontent; riots

Ministries/authorities at local
and/or national levels responsible
for:
 Health
 Interior affairs
 Foreign affairs
 Culture and religious affairs
 Event-organising committees
(national and international
levels)
 Regional and local
authorities
 Professional associations
and boards
 Religious leaders and
organisations

All mass gathering events
 Financial losses for organisers and possible rise in
unemployment
 Financial losses for attendees (ticket fees,
accommodation fees, transportation fees, etc.)
 Financial losses for affiliated businesses (media, catering,
sponsorships, etc.)
 Damage to brand names
 Subsequent decreases in tourism
 Decreased revenue from taxes
 Disappointment from fans who consider cancellation an
overreaction (with potential accompanying political cost)

Ministries/ authorities at local
and/or national levels (may need
to escalate to the highest
government authority) responsible
for:
 Health
 Interior
 Regional & local authorities
 Businesses and trade unions
 Homeowner and rental
associations
 Judicial system and law
enforcement bodies
 Civil protection
 Long-term care facilities
 Prisons
 Mental health care facilities
 Community and faith leaders
 Education

All areas
 Consideration of which categories of activities and
individuals could be exempted from the restrictions
 Considering the needs of older adults, persons with
disabilities, and other vulnerable individuals (e.g.
homeless people, people with mental health problems,
and undocumented migrants)
 Timing of the announcement in order to minimise the
number of people seeking to ‘escape’ before enforcement
 Need to ensure availability of basic necessities including
food, water, medicine, and sanitation supplies
 Functioning utilities (water, gas, electricity, internet)
 Human rights of people living in the area
 Significant financial losses throughout the region
 Need to frequently revisit rationale to ensure that social
distancing measures are still needed
 Need to ensure access to health services for the
population within the cordon
 Need to ensure appropriate measures are taken within
the cordon to decrease transmission within the population

Faith-based events
Given that religious leaders play a strong role in shaping
opinions, they need to be engaged early in the process in
order to facilitate adherence

Businesses
 Financial losses for most or all businesses
 Loss of employment
 Change in patterns of commerce
 Interrupted supply/delivery
Note: For details of these measures and their rationale, please see Table 1.

9

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

Contributing authors (in alphabetical order)
Cornelia Adlhoch, Agoritsa Baka, Massimo Ciotti, Joana Gomes Dias, John Kinsman, Katrin Leitmeyer, Angeliki
Melidou, Teymur Noori, Anastasia Pharris, Pasi Penttinen, Paul Riley, Andreea Salajan, Jonathan Suk, Svetla
Tsolova, Marieke van der Werf, Emma Wiltshire, Andrea Würz

10

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

References
1.

Anderson R, Heesterbeek H, Klinkenberg D, Hollingswort T. How will country-based mitigation measures
influence the course of the COVID-19 epidemic? Lancet. 2020.

2.

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Guidelines for the use of non-pharmaceutical
measures to delay and mitigate the impact of 2019-nCoV. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020.

3.

COVID-19: ‘Top priority’ must be on containment, insists WHO’s Tedros: UN News; 2020. Available from:
https://news.un.org/en/story/2020/03/1058461.

4.

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19): increased transmission globally – fifth update. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020.

4a.

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA and the UK – sixth update, 12 March 2020. Stockholm:
ECDC; 2020.

5.

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The use of evidence in decision making during public
health emergencies. Stockholm: ECDC; 2019.

6.

WHO. Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Geneva: World
Health Organization; 2020.

7.

Hatchett R, Mecher C, Lipsitch M. Public health interventions and epidemic intensity during the 1918
influenza pandemic PNAS. 2007;104 (18):7582–7.

8.

Medicine Io. Modeling community containment for pandemic influenza: a letter report. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press; 2006.

9.

Lai S, Ruktanonchai N, Zhou L, Prosper O, Luo W, Floyd J. Effect of non-pharmaceutical interventions for
containing the COVID-19 outbreak: an observational and modelling study. medRxiv. 2020.

10.

Ipsos Mori. Poll of 8 countries finds majority say coronavirus poses a threat to the world 2020. Available
from: https://www.ipsos.com/ipsos-mori/en-uk/poll-8-countries-finds-majority-say-coronavirus-posesthreat-world.

11.

United Nations, Economic and Social Council (UNESCO). Siracusa principles on the limitation and derogation
provisions in the international covenant on civil and political rights, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/1985/4, Annex (1985).
United Nations; 1985 [Available from: http://hrlibrary.umn.edu/instree/siracusaprinciples.html.

12.

WHO. International Health Regulations. 3 ed. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2005.

13.

Calain P, Poncin M. Reaching out to Ebola victims: coercion, persuasion or an appeal for self-sacrifice? Soc
Sci Med. 2015;147:126-33.

14.

Gonsalves G, Kapczynski A, Ko A, Parmet W, Burris S. Achieving A Fair and Effective COVID-19 Response:
An Open Letter to Vice-President Mike Pence, and Other Federal, State and Local Leaders from Public
Health and Legal Experts in the United States.: Yale School of Public Health, Yale Law School; 2020.

15.

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Guidance on community engagement for public health
events caused by communicable disease threats in the EU/EEA. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020.

16.

Desclaux A, Badjib D, Ndioneb A, Sow K. Accepted monitoring or endured quarantine? Ebola contacts'
perceptions in Senegal. Social Science & Medicine. 2017;178:38-45.

17.

Brooks S, Webster R, Smith L, Woodland L, Wessely S, Greenberg N. The psychological impact of
quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid review of the evidence. Lancet. 2020.

18.

Brown L, Trujillo L, Macintyre K. Interventions to Reduce HIV/AIDS Stigma: What Have We Learned? :
Horizons Program, Tulane University; 2001.

19.

DiGiovanni C, Conley J, Chiu D, Zaborski J. Factors Influencing Compliance with Quarantine in Toronto
During the 2003 SARS Outbreak. Biosecurity and Bioterrorism: Biodefense Strategy, Practice, and Science.
2004;2(4):265-72.

20.

Barbera J, Macintyre A, Gostin L. Large-scale quarantine following biological terrorism in the United States –
Scientific Examination, Logistic and Legal Limits, and Possible Consequences. JAMA. 2001;286(21):2711-7.

21.

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19): increased transmission globally – fifth update, 2 March 2020. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020.

22.

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Community and institutional public health emergency
preparedness synergies – enablers and barriers. Case studies on acute gastroenteritis in two EU/EEA
Member States. Stockholm: ECDC; 2019.

23.

Willem L, Hoang T, Funk S, Coletti P, Beutels P, Hens N. SOCRATES: An online tool leveraging a social
contact data sharing initiative to assess mitigation strategies for COVID-19. medRxiv. 2020.

11

ECDC REPORT

Guidance for social distancing measures aimed at minimising the spread of SARS-CoV-2

24.

International Organization for Standardization. ISO 22301:2019 Security and resilience — Business
continuity management systems — Requirements. Geneva: ISO; 2019.

25.

UNESCO. Covid-19 and education 2020 [Available from: https://en.unesco.org/themes/educationemergencies/coronavirus-school-closures.

26.

CDC – Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Strategies to prevent the spread of covid-19 in long-term
care facilities (LTCF). Atlanta: CDC; 2020. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/healthcare-facilities/prevent-spread-in-long-term-care-facilities.html.

27.

Abubakar I, Gautret P, Brunette GW, Blumberg L, Johnson D, Poumerol G, et al. Global perspectives for
prevention of infectious diseases associated with mass gatherings. The Lancet Infectious Diseases.
2012;12(1):66-74.

28.

World Health Organization. Key planning recommendations for mass gatherings in the context of the
current COVID-19 outbreak - Interim Guidance WHO; 2020 14 February 2020

29.

CDC – Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Preventing COVID-19 spread in communities. Atlanta:
CDC; 2020.

30.

Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team. Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand. 16 March 2020. London: Imperial College; 2020. Available
from: https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/sph/ide/gida-fellowships/ImperialCollege-COVID19-NPI-modelling-16-03-2020.pdf

31.

Qualls N, Levitt A, Kanade N, et al. Community mitigation guidelines to prevent pandemic influenza —
United States, 2017. MMWR Recomm Rep 2017;66(No. RR-1):1–34. Available from:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr6601a1

32.

World Health Organisation. Non-pharmaceutical public health measures for mitigating the risk and impact of
epidemic and pandemic influenza. Geneva: WHO; 2019. Available from:
https://www.who.int/influenza/publications/public_health_measures/publication/en/

33.

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine
and monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases in the EU/EEA. ECDC: Stockholm; 2020.

34.

Ali ST, Cowling BJ, Lau E, Fang VJ, Leung GM. Mitigation of influenza B epidemic with school closures, Hong
Kong, 2018. Emerging infectious diseases, 24(11), 2071–2073. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2411.180612

35.

Public Health England. Guidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK – 20 March 2020 [internet,
accessed 23 Mar 2020]. London: PHE; 2020. Available from:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-guidance-on-social-distancing-and-for-vulnerablepeople/guidance-on-social-distancing-for-everyone-in-the-uk-and-protecting-older-people-and-vulnerableadults

12

