Correspondence

Experts’ request to the
Spanish Government:
move Spain towards
complete lockdown
We would like to express our concern
about the limited capacity of actions
taken by the Spanish Government to
successfully control the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus
 (SARS-CoV-) outbreak and end
the exponential growth phase of
new cases. The measures taken so
far, consisting primarily of partial
restriction mobility, are in the right
direction, although some researchers
have warned about the pressure placed
on the building blocks of the health
system.
Given that the actual extent of
an epidemic can only be assessed
retrospectively, governments and
policy makers are forced to make
decisions on the basis of mathematical
models of other diseases and pre­
vious experiences by other countries
taking different actions. In Spain,
various models simulating the spread
of infection and using different
assumptions converge in a landscape
of a high number of new cases within
the next few weeks. Simulations have
been done using the URV and UNIZAR
models to predict the progression of
the number of patients who will require
admission into hospital intensive
care units because of coronavirus
disease  (COVID-) in three
scenarios (appendix): scenario , no
mobility restrictions; scenario , partial
restriction of mobility (ie, move­
ment to the workplace allowed for
% of people); and scenario ,
complete restriction of mobility (ie, no
workplace mobility allowed except for
essential services).
The model suggests that the
actions taken to date, consistent
with scenario , will be insufficient
to prevent hospitals and intensive
care units from being overwhelmed
over the coming weeks. The foreseen
collapse of the health system, along

with the age distribution of the
Spanish population (ie, % of people
aged ≥ years), suggests a potentially
high mortality rate associated with
COVID- in the country. According
to our models, the current state is
associated with a very high risk of
saturation of our health system, which
is expected to last from March  to
April ,  (appendix). Therefore,
we urge the Spanish Government
to implement, as swiftly as possible,
more drastic measures to minimise
the impact of the pandemic on the
Spanish population.
As a reference framework (to be
adjusted, if applicable), we suggest the
following measures. Establish regional
categories according to the number
of cases per   population and
implement a package of multiple
interventions that fit each category
(appendix). For example, type A areas
(≥ cases per ⁵ inhabitants in the
past  days) implement a complete
shutdown of the region and citizen
lockdown, except for essential services
(eg, hospitals, health care, and research
centres) for a minimum period of
– days. This category includes, as
of March , , the Autonomous
Communities of La Rioja ( cases
per  inhabitants), Madrid (),
Navarra (), Basque Country (),
Castilla-La Mancha (), Catalonia
(), and Castilla y León ().
Type B areas (< cases per
⁵ inhabitants), which include
all areas that are not considered
type A, apply partial confinement
(% of work activity and % of
internal movement allowed) and close
monitoring of the growth rate of new
infections. If the number of cases
in a type B area increases sharply,
it becomes a type A area. All nonessential inter-regional land, sea,
and air transport must be totally
interrupted for at least  days.
To implement combined nonpharmacological interventions for
several weeks, including complete
restriction of movement, work
interruption, and social distancing,

www.thelancet.com Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-	

banning all travel and all non-basic
economic activities, together with the
intensified use of diagnostic tests in
suspected cases has proven to yield
good results. Also, there is an urgent
need to establish a purchasing and
supply channel for personal protective
equipment, which is currently insuf­
ficient for health personnel who
are highly exposed to and prone to
contagion. The recent finding on the
spreading capacity of SARS-CoV- by
contamination of eyelashes and hair
reinforces this need.
The proposed suppression policies
will not mean the end of CoVID- in
Spain in the initial – weeks; therefore,
the development of strategies to
sustain the gains is critical. A key lesson
from the Asian experience is the need
to create a robust surveillance system
capable of collecting and reporting
epidemiological data down to the
individual or household level. There
are two pillars for the development of
such a system: () the development
and implementation of a universal
mobile application for self-reporting
of suspected COVID- symptoms as
well as apps to support contact tracing
efforts (eg, TraceTogether mobile
app; Singapore); and () increased
diagnostic capacity to test all individuals
with symptoms for early isolation.
The identification of an increase in
the number of cases in an area would
trigger quick remedial measures like the
implementation of early and targeted
suppression actions.
Importantly, we beg the Spanish
Government to facilitate the access
of the scientific community to
outbreak data, thus providing artificial
intelligence support in simulation
and modelling, and to create core
support groups that coordinate a
comprehensive, objective, and trans­
parent scientific response.

Published Online
March , 
https://doi.org/./
S-()-

See Online for appendix

We declare no competing interests.

*Oriol Mitjà, Àlex Arenas, Xavier Rodó,
Aurelio Tobias, Joe Brew,
José M Benlloch on behalf of
 signatories†
omitja@flsida.org

Submissions should be
made via our electronic
submission system at
http://ees.elsevier.com/
thelancet/



Correspondence

†Signatories are listed in the appendix. JB is an
independent data analyst.
Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol,
 Badalona, Spain (OM); Universitat Rovira i
Virgili, Tarragona, Spain (AA); ICREA and Climate &
Health Program, Barcelona Institute for Global
Health, Barcelona, Spain (XR); Instituto de
Diagnóstico Ambiental y Estudios del Agua, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, Barcelona,
Spain (AT); and Instituto de Instrumentacdion para
Imagen Molecular, Universidad Politecnica de
Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, Valencia, Spain (JMB)
	

	

	

	

	

	

Legido-Quigley H, Mateos-García JT,
Campos VR, Gea-Sánchez M, Muntaner C,
McKee M. The resilience of the Spanish health
system against the COVID- pandemic.
Lancet Public Health ; published online
March . https://doi.org/./
S-()-.
European Centre for Disease Prevention
and Control. Rapid risk assessment.
Novel coronavirus disease  (COVID-)
pandemic: increased transmission in the
EU/EEA and the UK–sixth update.
March , . https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/
sites/default/files/documents/RRA-sixthupdate-Outbreak-of-novel-coronavirusdisease--COVID-.pdf (accessed
March , ).
Li R, Pei S, Chen B, et al. Substantial
undocumented infection facilitates the rapid
dissemination of novel coronavirus
(COVID-). medRxiv ; published online
March . DOI:...
(preprint).
Yan Y, Chen H, Chen L, et al. Consensus of
Chinese experts on protection of skin and
mucous membrane barrier for health
professions fighting against coronavirus
disease . Chinese J Dermatology ;
published online March . DOI:./
dth..
COVID- National Emergency Response
Center, Epidemiology & Case Management
Team, Korea Centers for Disease Control &
Prevention. Contact transmission of
COVID- in South Korea: novel investigation
techniques for tracing contacts.
Osong Public Heal Res Perspect ;
: –.

www.thelancet.com Published online March ,  https://doi.org/./S-()-

