Page  of 

Views and Reviews

VIEWS AND REVIEWS
WOUNDED HEALER

Clare Gerada: Doctors on the covid- front line also
need to protect themselves and their colleagues
Clare Gerada GP partner
Hurley Group, London

I brought more than a fridge magnet back from my recent trip
to New York. Unbeknown to me, I also brought back covid-.
I confused the initial symptoms of fatigue with jet lag. I thought
that the dry cough was secondary to the effects of the cabin air.
However, it was quite clear that a high temperature wasn’t a
symptom of jet lag, and very soon after arriving back in the UK
I realised that I’d developed the illness that’s been on everyone’s
mind for weeks.
The NHS was still routinely testing, although in the community
this was only for people who had returned from a list of
countries deemed to be high risk. At that time the US was not
included among these. However, given my role as a GP and the
fact that New York had just declared a state of emergency, I
was given a test. Although it didn’t change my management, it
reassured me to know what I was dealing with.
The symptoms came on quickly. I went from being completely
well to being poleaxed in the space of two hours or so. The
symptoms are as they say on the tin—high temperature and dry
cough. Add to that a headache, chest pain, muscle aches, metallic
taste in the mouth, loss of appetite, and rigors, and you get the
picture. I spent three days in bed, rising only to use the
bathroom. I’m now left with fatigue and muscle pains, but even
these are receding, and I hope that in a few days’ time the only
evidence that I’ve had this at all will be the antibodies,
conferring (hopefully) immunity.
In time, other UK doctors will get this infection. Many around
the world already have. As in any health crisis, the role of
doctors is pivotal. We’ll be on the front line of this pandemic.
Patients and the public will look to us for guidance, support,
treatment, and reassurance. Already, friends of mine who were
planning to hang up their stethoscopes are staying on. Others
are planning to come back from recent retirement to help out.

We know from colleagues in Italy that doctors are having to
make difficult decisions (normally done only on the battlefield)
about which patients should receive precious resources and
which ones should be left to fend for themselves. Doctors will
be making personal sacrifices to help—and they will, as history
shows us, make the needs of their patients their first concern.
But doctors also have an ethical duty to protect themselves and
their colleagues. Currently (and this may have changed by the
time this goes to print), this means wearing protective equipment
when in contact with patients thought to be infected, following
personal hygiene guidance, and taking enough rest and
recuperation between shifts. I appreciated the texts and emails
I got from friends and colleagues. What also helped was
receiving a call from the hospital where I’d been tested, to find
out how I was. That simple act of reaching out meant that I
didn’t feel so frightened.
So much will already be different. For example, we’re all gearing
up to work remotely. Our practice is trying to move over %
of all contacts remotely. Revalidation, appraisal, inspections by
the Care Quality Commission, continuing professional
development, and many more burdens on our working lives are
already being removed. I’m through my covid- experience.
I’m now keen to return to work and help my colleagues out, in
what’s going to be a long, tough, and no doubt anxious few
months.
Competing interests: See www.bmj.com/about-bmj/freelance-contributors.
Provenance and peer review: Commissioned; not externally peer reviewed.
Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not already
granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/
permissions

clare.gerada@nhs.net Follow Clare on Twitter: @ClareGerada
For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

BMJ: first published as ./bmj.m on  March . Downloaded from http://www.bmj.com/ on  March  at India:BMJ-PG Sponsored. Protected by copyright.

BMJ ;:m doi: ./bmj.m (Published  March )

