The

NEW ENGLA ND JOURNAL

of

MEDICINE

Perspective
﻿

Virtually Perfect? Telemedicine for Covid-19
Judd E. Hollander, M.D., and Brendan G. Carr, M.D.​​
Virtually Perfect? Telemedicine for Covid-19

R

ecognizing that patients prioritize convenient
and inexpensive care, Duffy and Lee recently
asked whether in-person visits should become the second, third, or even last option for
meeting patient needs.1 Previous
work has specifically described the
potential for using telemedicine
in disasters and public health
emergencies.2 No telemedicine
program can be created overnight, but U.S. health systems
that have already implemented
telemedical innovations can leverage them for the response to
Covid-19.
A central strategy for health
care surge control is “forward
triage” — the sorting of patients
before they arrive in the emergency department (ED). Direct-to-consumer (or on-demand) telemedicine, a 21st-century approach to
forward triage that allows patients to be efficiently screened,
is both patient-centered and conducive to self-quarantine, and it
protects patients, clinicians, and
the community from exposure. It

can allow physicians and patients
to communicate 24/7, using smartphones or webcam-enabled computers. Respiratory symptoms —
which may be early signs of
Covid-19 — are among the conditions most commonly evaluated
with this approach. Health care
providers can easily obtain detailed travel and exposure histories. Automated screening algorithms can be built into the intake
process, and local epidemiologic
information can be used to standardize screening and practice
patterns across providers.
More than 50 U.S. health systems already have such programs.
Jefferson Health, Mount Sinai,
Kaiser Permanente, Cleveland
Clinic, and Providence, for example, all leverage telehealth technology to allow clinicians to see
patients who are at home. Systems

lacking such programs can outsource similar services to physicians and support staff provided
by Teladoc Health or American
Well. At present, the major barrier
to large-scale telemedical screening for SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus causing Covid-19, is
coordination of testing. As the
availability of testing sites expands, local systems that can test
appropriate patients while minimizing exposure — using dedicated office space, tents, or in-car
testing — will need to be developed and integrated into telemedicine workflows.
Rather than expect all outpatient practices to keep up with rapidly evolving recommendations regarding Covid-19, health systems
have developed automated logic
flows (bots) that refer moderateto-high-risk patients to nurse triage lines but are also permitting
patients to schedule video visits
with established or on-demand
providers, to avoid travel to in-person care sites. Jefferson Health’s
telemedical systems have been suc-

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org ﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March 28, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

1

Virtually Perfect? Telemedicine for Covid-19

PERS PE C T IV E

cessfully deployed to evaluate and
treat patients without referring
them to in-person care. When testing is needed, this approach requires centralized coordination
with practice personnel as well as
federal and local testing agencies.
It is critical that practices not routinely refer patients to EDs, urgent
care centers, or offices, which
risks exposure of other patients
and health care providers.
Patients presenting for in-person care who screen positive for
high-risk features should be isolated immediately to avert further
contact with patients and health
care workers. Before the Covid-19
outbreak, many EDs modified the
“provider-in-triage model” (rapid
initial evaluation and testing) by
allowing a remote provider to
perform intake.3 Aurora Health,
for example, partnered with a
commercial telemedicine vendor,
and others have developed their
own software for this purpose.
In an emergency situation, webconferencing software with a secure open line from a triage room
to a clinician can be implemented
relatively rapidly. Covering multiple sites with a single remote clinician can address some workforce challenges, but it is difficult
to do if your software lacks a
queuing function.
Tablet computers can be
cleaned between patients using
well-defined infection-control procedures. In ambulatory care settings, patients screening positive
at presentation can be given a tablet and isolated in an exam room.
A telehealth visit can be conducted
without exposing staff by using
commercial systems or paired tablets allowing communication with
a clinician through a dedicated
connection. Because of supplychain challenges, we rapidly re-

2

purposed and deployed tablets
we already had. We expect that
Covid-19 testing will be more
widely available shortly, but initially patients who were well enough
to be sent home were quarantined
there while home-based testing
was coordinated. This system
works for patients who are well but
cannot totally eliminate health
care workers’ exposure to sick
patients who require procedures.
Similar televisit systems are also
being used for hospitalized patients to reduce exposure risks for
visitors and staff.
Electronic intensive care unit
(e-ICU) monitoring programs,
which allow nurses and physicians to remotely monitor the status of 60 to 100 patients in ICUs
in multiple hospitals — such as
services offered by Mercy Virtual
Care Center, Sutter Health, and
Sentara Healthcare — are ideal
for monitoring sicker patients.
Technological and staffing complexities make it impossible to
create such a program on short
notice, but rapid deployment of
the two-tablet approach can reduce health care workers’ contact
with infected patients in the ICU.
Community paramedicine or
mobile integrated health care programs allow patients to be treated
in their homes, with higher-level
medical support provided virtually. Houston’s Project ETHAN
(Emergency Telehealth and Navigation) has used telemedical oversight by physicians to augment
care offered in person by 911 responders, reducing the need for
transportation to the ED.4 In the
face of Covid-19, Avera Health is
preparing to send mobile home
health care units directly to patients and is coordinating homebased testing. For sicker patients
at home, such programs can fa-

cilitate evaluation before hospital
transfer, potentially allowing them
to bypass the ED and be placed
directly in a hospital bed, reducing
exposure for health care workers
and other patients.
Much medical decision making
is cognitive, and telemedicine can
provide rapid access to subspecialists who aren’t immediately available in person. This approach has
been explored most fully in the
context of stroke, for which systems such as Jefferson Health,
Cleveland Clinic, and the University of Pittsburgh provide virtual
emergency neurologic care at
large numbers of hospitals. The
Mount Sinai system leverages specialists at eight hospitals and more
than 300 sites to provide virtual
emergency consultations and distribute work among subspecialty
providers. The barriers to implementing these programs are largely related to payment, credentialing, and staffing of specialists.
Reports that as many as 100
health care workers at a single institution have to be quarantined at
home because of exposure to
Covid-19 have raised concern about
workforce capacity. At institutions
with ED tele-intake or direct-toconsumer care, quarantined physicians can cover those services,
freeing up other physicians to
perform in-person care. Officebased practices can also employ
quarantined physicians to care for
patients remotely. The challenge
is that other health professionals
(nurses, medical assistants, physician assistants) also contribute
to in-person care, and telemedicine cannot replace them all.
To prepare for the worst-case
scenario — a local pandemic that
leaves health care workers quarantined, sick, or absent — Jefferson
Health is deploying telehealth so

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org ﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March 28, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

PE R S PE C T IV E

that clinicians can continue to
care for established (nonexposed)
patients by converting scheduled
office visits to telemedicine visits.
These visits can be conducted with
both patient and clinician at home,
greatly limiting travel and exposure and permitting uninterrupted care of established patients.
Online training modules and remote training sessions are available for clinicians or patients who
require just-in-time training or assistance during their first call.
The main barriers to maintaining usual care by telemedicine
require changes that are unlikely
to come from the federal level.
Commercial reimbursement, Medicaid reimbursement, and credentialing are the states’ domain.
Only 20% of states require payment parity between telemedicine
and in-person services.5 Fortunately, both the Centers for Medicare

Virtually Perfect? Telemedicine for Covid-19

and Medicaid Services and some
local commercial payers have
modified payment policy in response to Covid-19. We hope others will follow suit.
Disasters and pandemics pose
unique challenges to health care
delivery. Though telehealth will
not solve them all, it’s well suited
for scenarios in which infrastructure remains intact and clinicians
are available to see patients.
Payment and regulatory structures, state licensing, credentialing across hospitals, and program
implementation all take time to
work through, but health systems
that have already invested in telemedicine are well positioned to
ensure that patients with Covid-19
receive the care they need. In this
instance, it may be a virtually perfect solution.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available at NEJM.org.

From Sidney Kimmel Medical College of
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia
(J.E.H.); and Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York (B.G.C.).
This article was published on March 11,
2020, at NEJM.org.
1.	 Duffy S, Lee TH. In-person health care

as option B. N Engl J Med 2018;​378:​104-6.

2.	 Lurie N, Carr BG. The role of telehealth

in the medical response to disasters. JAMA
Intern Med 2018;​178:​745-6 .
3.	 Joshi AU, Randolph FT, Chang AM, et
al. Impact of emergency department teleintake on left without being seen and
throughput metrics. Acad Emerg Med 2020;​
27:​139-47.
4.	 Langabeer JR II, Gonzalez M, Alqusairi
D, et al. Telehealth-enabled emergency medical services program reduces ambulance
transport to urban emergency departments.
West J Emerg Med 2016;​17:​713-20.
5.	 Lacktman NM, Acosta JN, Levine SJ.
50-State survey of telehealth commercial
payer statutes. Foley.com/Telemedicine,
December 2019 (https://www​.foley​.com/​​-­/​
media/​f iles/​insights/​health​-­care​-­law​-­today/​
19mc21486​-­50state​-­survey​-­of​-­telehealth​
-­commercial​.pdf).
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMp2003539
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.
Virtually Perfect? Telemedicine for Covid-19

n engl j med﻿﻿  nejm.org ﻿

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org on March 28, 2020. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

3

