medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Epidemiological Trends of Coronavirus Disease  in China
Bilin Chen, Huanhuan Zhong, Yueyan Ni, Lulu Liu, Jinjin Zhong, Xin Su,,*


Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China


Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Jinling, Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China



Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Jinling, Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China
* Correspondence:
Xin Su
suxinjs@.com

Key words: Coronavirus Disease , epidemiology, disease control, coronavirus,
infection
ABSTRACT
Background: The Coronavirus Disease  (COVID-) epidemic broke out in Wuhan,
China, and it spread rapidly. Since January , , China has launched a series of unusual
and strict measures, including the lockdown of Wuhan city to contain this highly contagious
disease. We collected the epidemiological data to analyze the trend of this epidemic in China.
Methods: We closely tracked the Chinese and global official websites to collect the
epidemiological information about COVID-. The number of total and daily new confirmed
cases of COVID- in China was presented to illustrate the trend of this epidemic.
Results: On January , ,  confirmed COVID- cases were reported in China. On
February , , there were  cases. By February , , the number reached as high
as ,. Most cases were distributed in and around Wuhan, Hubei province. Since January
, , the number of daily new cases in China except Hubei province reached a peak of
 on the eleventh day and then it declined to a low level of  within two full-length
incubation periods ( days), and the number of daily new cases in Hubei also started to
decrease on the twelfth day, from  on February ,  to  on February , .
Conclusion: The COVID- epidemic has been primarily contained in China. The battle
against this epidemic in China has provided valuable experiences for the rest of the world.
Strict measures need to be taken as earlier as possible to prevent its spread.


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
Emerging infectious diseases are great threats to public health worldwide. Towards the end of
the year , an outbreak of a novel coronavirus (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus , SARS-CoV-)(-) infection occurred in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. It
rapidly spread to every corner of China and many other places around the world. SARS-CoV is a new member of the coronavirus family, which is different to Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome Coronavirus, SARS-CoV.() Current reports show that SARS-CoV- is more
contagious than SARS-CoV. The new coronavirus pneumonia has been named as
Coronavirus Disease  (COVID-) by the World Health Organization.()
On February , , the total number of confirmed COVID- cases had reached as high
as , in China. Among these cases,  died, and most of the deaths occurred in elderly
patients with certain underlying illnesses.(-) To confront this terrible epidemic, China took
restrictive measures to prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-. Restricting the population
movement, shutting down of schools and factories, building up new shelter hospitals, and
many other measures were carried out. In addition to ordinary measures, the lockdown of
Wuhan since January , , a city with more than  million people, was a unique and
unusual method. At the same time, many provinces and cities in China initiated a level I
public health event response. To further control the epidemic, from February th, , all
confirmed and suspected COVID- patients and close contacts in Wuhan were asked to
quarantine at assembly sites instead of home quarantine. What is the effect of these countermeasures for controlling this epidemic?
The National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China (NHC) and The Center
for Disease Control and Prevention of China (CDC) have publicly shared detailed
epidemiological information about COVID- every day since January , .(, ) Based
on the information and published studies about COVID-, many scholars have expressed
different opinions on the effect of these measures and the trend of this epidemic. Michael
Levitt, a professor of Stanford University, speculated that since January , , the
national death toll and the death toll in Hubei province showed a monotonous declining trend.
The external linear correlation suggests that the number of new deaths in the coming week
will decline rapidly, leading to the conclusion that the epidemic would terminate soon.()
However, there are many other different opinions. The University of Lancaster, the
University of Florida, and the Centre for Viral Research at the University of Glasgow carried
out modeling analysis based on the data before January , . They estimated that the
number of infected individuals may be as high as  cases on January ,  in Wuhan.
If there were no effective measures, the total number of infection cases would reach as high
as  on January , .() A team of researchers from Xi'an Jiaotong University in
China and York University in Canada worked together to build a more realistic SusceptibleExposed-Infectious-Recovered (SEIR) model, and the novel coronavirus infection could
reach an inflection point on March , .()


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Big gaps existed between different predictions. Which one is identical with the actual
situation? In addition, being the eye of the storm, Wuhan city and Hubei Province show a
different situation compared to that in the other provinces in China. Therefore, we compared
the data of different places to predict the trend of this epidemic in China.
METHODS
Sources of data and searches
According to the study of early epidemiology of COVID- transmission, the incubation
period of COVID- extends from  to  days.() Therefore, we collected data of  days
(two full-length incubation periods) to analyze the trend of COVID- in China. We closely
tracked the relevant resources including Chinese and global official websites and
announcements between January ,  and February , . China's data are based on
the everyday briefing by the NHC() and CDC(). The relevant data included the provincial
distribution of the epidemic on each day from January ,  to February , .
Case Definitions
According to the diagnostic and treatment protocol for COVID- (Trial version  revision)
released by the NHC(), confirmed cases were patients with laboratory-confirmed SARSCoV- by real-time RT-PCR or next-generation sequencing. Comprehensive analysis of the
epidemiological history, clinical manifestations, and evidence of virus nucleic acid was
required. Clinically diagnosed cases were patients with a definite epidemiological history and
typical clinical manifestations.
Statistical analysis
Retrieved data were recorded in Microsoft Excel for Windows (version .) for analysis.
Continuous variables included the total number of confirmed cases daily, the number of
newly confirmed cases, the number of deaths, and the number of severe and critical cases.
Graph pad version .. (GraphPad Software, America), Tableau version .. (Tableau
Software, America), and Xmind version .. (Xmind Ltd, China) were used for cartography.
Data from  January  to  February  were utilized for China map drawing.
RESULTS
COVID- was distributed in every province of China. Most of the cases were distributed in
and around Wuhan city, China. As shown in Figure , the number of COVID- cases
increased rapidly. From January ,  to February , , the total number of cases
increased from  to , in just  days. Most cases were found in the worst-hit areas of
Hubei province. In Hubei, more cases were identified between February ,  and
February , . The epidemic spread rapidly from Hubei province to adjacent provinces
and the whole country. In other provinces except Hubei, most cases were identified between
January ,  and February , .


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Since January , , Wuhan, the capital city of Hubei Province, was in lockdown. Many
other provinces responded to the public health incidents by adopting quarantine measures and
community-level monitoring to control the epidemic spread. Figure  shows the changes in
the cumulative number of confirmed cases and the daily number of new confirmed cases
since the lockdown of Wuhan, Hubei province, on January , .
Figure A shows that the cumulative number of confirmed cases kept increasing. Most of the
cases were found in Hubei Province. Total number of confirmed cases outside Hubei
province in China was , on February , . Total number of confirmed cases in
Hubei province was , on February , . Figure B shows the daily change in the
number of new confirmed cases since January , . The daily number of new confirmed
cases in most provinces of China showed a downward trend, including Hubei Province. The
number of increased cases in the other provinces in China was significantly lower than that in
Hubei province. The number of daily increased cases in the other provinces in China reached
a peak of  on February , , and then it continued to decline to as low as  on
February , . The number of daily increased cases in Hubei province began to decline
on February , .
The number of daily new cases in the other provinces except Hubei in China is presented in
Figure . The number of daily new confirmed cases in  provinces shared almost the same
obvious trend, increasing before February ,  and then declining. These provincial units
are listed in the order of the total case numbers as follows: Guangdong, Henan, Zhejiang,
Hunan, Anhui, Jiangxi, Shandong, Jiangsu, Chongqing, Sichuan, Heilongjiang, Beijing,
Shanghai, Hebei, Fujian, Guangxi, Shaanxi, Yunnan, Hainan, Guizhou, Shanxi, Tianjin,
Liaoning, Gansu, and Jilin.
After Hubei province, the four provinces with the highest number of COVID- cases in
China were Guangdong, Henan, Zhejiang, and Hunan province. Figure  shows the time
curves of the total confirmed cases and daily new cases in these four provinces. The overall
trend of the total number of confirmed cases and the number of daily new cases in the four
provinces showed almost the same trend. About  days (one incubation period) later, the
number of daily new cases began to decline. After  days (two incubation periods), the
number of daily new confirmed cases dropped to single digits.
DISCUSSION
The COVID- emergency response epidemiology team of CDC in China conducted an
epidemiological analysis on COVID- and pointed out that since the first case was admitted
to hospital in Wuhan in December, the outbreak had developed rapidly.() Based on the
current reports, although the mortality rate is lower than that of SARS and Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), COVID- appears to be more infectious.(-) The above
studies suggest that stricter measures need to be taken to contain the COVID- epidemic.



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Realizing this critical situation, China adopted an old fashioned approach but the response in
China changed over time to science and risk based approach, and China adopted a bold
approach. The specific event timeline is shown in Figure . The data in this paper were
released after the implementation of strict measures on January , . The trends in these
figures suggested that the epidemic had been contained in the two incubation periods after the
emergency response was upgraded to the highest level and strictly implemented around
China.
The major prevention and control measures are shown in Figure ; as the outbreak spread and
the death toll increased, the Chinese government and healthcare authorities implemented
unprecedented measures. Since January , , Wuhan was in lockdown. All public
transportation was suspended, The whole city was quarantined and monitored.() Soon
after, these measures were extended to the remaining of Hubei Province and many other
provinces in China.
Since the lockdown of Wuhan city, the shift of population from Wuhan city and Hubei
province to the other parts of China ceased. The Chinese New Year holiday was
extended.() The Ministry of Education postponed the school opening.() Meanwhile, the
Ministry of Civil Affairs and the NHC further carried out community-level prevention in
urban and rural areas.(-)
Figure  also shows that since January , , the peak of new confirmed cases daily
occurred from February  to February . The report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on
COVID- indicates that according to the date of onset, the confirmed cases peaked between
January  and January .() The peak of confirmed cases occurred  to  days later
than the peak of onset, which is almost the length of the incubation period.
Although the total number of cases in Hubei province is still rising, the trend has begun to
slow down, and the number of daily new cases in China has decreased significantly. Other
than Hubei, four provinces of Zhejiang, Guangdong, Henan, and Hunan had the highest
number of COVID- cases (Figure ). In one infectious incubation period ( days), the
number of daily new cases reached the peak, and it decreased continuously in the second
incubation period (– days).
After the adoption of strict prevention and control measures on January , , the daily
number of new confirmed cases decreased significantly in the two infectious incubation
periods ( days). The epidemic reached its peak earlier in most provinces than that
suggested by many prediction models. This shows that China's aggressive approach has
changed the course of the epidemic.
On comparing Figure A with B, we found that the number of newly confirmed cases in
Hubei province decreased significantly since February , . The increase in confirmed
cases also slowed down. Since the opening of a shelter hospital in Hubei province around
February th and strengthening of the community-level quarantine, the transmission from


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

person to person was further inhibited. After two incubation periods, the number of existing
confirmed cases began to decline.
In summary, COVID- is quite different from SARS. It is even more infectious and
destructive. There are still many uncertainties about the epidemic. After the adoption of
aggressive measures, China has contained the epidemic. However, the cost is huge. Millions
of healthcare workers and social workers have devoted themselves in the fight against this
epidemic. Some of them have even dedicated their lives. Currently, the number of COVID-
cases is increasing in many other countries. The battle against COVID- in China has
provided many valuable experiences for the rest of the world.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTORS
Xin Su had the conception for and designed the study, and take responsibility for the integrity
of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Bilin Chen, Huanhuan Zhong, Yueyan Ni,
Lulu Liu and Jinjin Zhong contributed to the data acquisition. Xin Su and Bilin Chen
contributed to the statistical analysis and interpretation. All authors contributed to data
acquisition, data analysis, or data interpretation, and reviewed and approved the final version.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. This data can be found here:
[http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/yqtb/list_gzbd.shtml and
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-/situation-reports].
POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS
All authors declare no competing interests.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Ethical approval for this study and written informed consent from the participants of the
study were not required in accordance with local legislation and national guidelines.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Project of Natural Science Foundation of China [Grant
number ], the Key Project of Jiangsu Commission of Health (K), and “
project” of Jiangsu Province (BRA). We thank LetPub (www.letpub.com) for its
linguistic assistance during the preparation of this manuscript.
REFERENCE
. Wuhan Municipal Health Commission. Report of clusterring pneumonia of unknown
etiology in Wuhan City. Wuhan, China: Wuhan Municipal Health Commission () [cited


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

 December ]. Available from:
http://wjw.wuhan.gov.cn/front/web/showDetail/.
. Pneumonia of unknown cause – China Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization
() [cited  January ]. Available from: https://www.who.int/csr/don/-january-pneumonia-of-unkown-cause-china/en/.
. Gorbalenya AE, Baker SC, Baric RS, de Groot RJ, Drosten C, Gulyaeva AA, et al.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: The species and its viruses – a
statement of the Coronavirus Study Group. bioRxiv ():.... doi:
./....
. Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, Niu P, Yang B, Wu H, et al. Genomic characterisation and
epidemiology of  novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor binding.
The Lancet (). doi: ./S-()-.
. WHO Director-General's remarks at the media briefing on -nCoV on  February
 Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization () [cited  February ].
Available from: https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-remarks-atthe-media-briefing-on--ncov-on--february-.
. Coronavirus disease (COVID-) situation reports Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization () [cited  February ]. Available from:
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-/situation-reports.
. National Health Commission's briefing on the pneumonia epidemic situation. ()
[cited  February ]. Available from: http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/yqtb/list_gzbd.shtml.
. Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention's briefing on the pneumonia epidemic
situation. : Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention () [cited  February
]. Available from: http://www.chinacdc.cn/jkzt/crb/zl/szkb_/jszl_/.
. Nobel laureate predicts Wuhan outbreak may be close to end: Sina science and
technology () [cited  February ]. Available from:
https://mbd.baidu.com/newspage/data/landingshare?pageType=&isBdboxFrom=&context
=%B%nid%:%news_%,%sourceFrom%:%bjh%
%D&_refluxos=i&from=singlemessage&isappinstalled=.
. Read JM, Bridgen JRE, Cummings DAT, Ho A, Jewell CP. Novel coronavirus nCoV: early estimation of epidemiological parameters and epidemic predictions. medRxiv
():.... doi: ./....
. Tang B, Wang X, Li Q, Bragazzi NL, Tang S, Xiao Y, et al. Estimation of the
Transmission Risk of the -nCoV and Its Implication for Public Health Interventions. J
Clin Med () ():E. doi: ./jcm. PubMed PMID: .
. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, et al. Early Transmission Dynamics in
Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia. N Engl J Med
():./NEJMoa. doi: ./NEJMoa. PubMed PMID:
.
. Diagnostic and treatment protocol for Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (Trial version 
revision): General Office of National Health Commission, General Office of National
Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine (). Available from:


medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/zhengcwj//dbefdfcafeea/files/ab
becfeefdcd.pdf.
. Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology T. The
epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of  novel coronavirus diseases (COVID) in China. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi () ():-. doi:
./cma.j.issn.-.... PubMed PMID: .
. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of patients infected
with  novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The Lancet () ():-. doi:
./S-()-.
. Paules CI, Marston HD, Fauci AS. Coronavirus Infections-More Than Just the Common
Cold. JAMA ():./jama... doi: ./jama... PubMed PMID:
.
. Wang C, Horby PW, Hayden FG, Gao GF. A novel coronavirus outbreak of global
health concern. The Lancet () ():-. doi: https://doi.org/./S()-.
. Announcement from the Headquarter for novel coronavirus pneumonia prevention and
control (No ). Beijing: China National Health Commission () [cited  January ].
Available from: http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/-//content_.htm.
. Notice of the General Office of the State Council on the extension of the Spring Festival
holiday in : The General Office of the State Council () [cited ]. Available
from: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/-//content_.htm.
. Notice of the Ministry of Education on the postponement of the start of the spring
semester in : The Ministry of Education () [cited  January ]. Available from:
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/-//content_.htm.
. Novel coronavirus pneumonia prevention and control program（version ）: General
Office of National Health Commission () [cited  January ]. Available from:
http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/zhengcwj//bfefddbfa/files/fa
abfeafebbeadbcb.pdf.
. Novel coronavirus pneumonia prevention and control program（version ）: General
Office of National Health Commission () [cited  February ]. Available from:
http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/zhengcwj//abbafdfdd/files/c
eaeaffdcbdacfe.pdf.
. Novel coronavirus pneumonia prevention and control program（version ）: General
Office of National Health Commission () [cited  February ]. Available from:
http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/zhengcwj//adfbcccdbab/files/
cbaeefafbecddf.pdf.
. Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease  (COVID-):
World Health Organization () [cited  February ]. Available from:
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-final-report.pdf.



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure . The number of confirmed cases in each province or region of China. Data before January ,  is
presented in purple, data from January ,  to February ,  is presented in green, and data from
February ,  to February ,  is presented in pink. A, the data of cases in Hubei Province, including
clinically diagnosed cases after February , . B, the data of confirmed cases in China except Hubei.

Figure . The data of the number of confirmed cases in China between January ,  at  pm and February
,  at  pm (Beijing time), (A). The total number of confirmed COVID- cases in China, (B). The
number of daily increased confirmed COVID- cases in China. From February , , in Hubei Province of
China, the number of confirmed cases and clinical diagnosed cases were calculated together and reported as one
number. Thus, the total number of cases for Hubei and China were presented till February , .



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure . The trends of daily new confirmed cases in the top  provincial units in terms of the total cases over
 were presented (The trend of Hubei has been presented in Figure B), including Guangdong, Henan,
Zhejiang, Hunan, Anhui, Jiangxi, Shandong, Jiangsu, Chongqing, Sichuan, Heilongjiang, Beijing, Shanghai,
Hebei, Fujian, Guangxi, Shaanxi, Yunnan, Hainan, Guizhou, Shanxi, Tianjin, Liaoning, Gansu, and Jilin. The
trends in each province were presented based on the data between January ,  at  pm and February ,
 at  pm (Beijing time).



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/./.... The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is
the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure . Changes in confirmed cases in four provinces of Guangdong, Henan, Zhejiang, and Hunan province;
data between January ,  at  pm and February ,  at  pm (Beijing time), (A) The total number
of confirmed COVID- cases in Zhejiang, Guangdong, Henan, and Hunan province. (B) The number of daily
increased confirmed COVID- cases in Guangdong, Henan, Zhejiang, and Hunan province.

Figure . Major prevention and control measures in China since January , .



