TECHNICAL REPORT

The use of evidence in decisionmaking during public health
emergencies

www.ecdc.europa.eu

ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT

The use of evidence in decision-making
during public health emergencies
Report on an Expert Workshop, – December 

This report of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) was coordinated by Massimo Ciotti,
Jonathan Suk and Svetla Tsolova (ECDC). It is based on a workshop (expert consultation) organised by Genny
Pecere and Andreea Salajan (ECDC).

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank all meeting participants for their active contributions and comments on earlier versions of
the report. We would also like to thank the meeting rapporteur, Megan Osler (Svea Scientific), for the first draft of
the report.

Suggested citation: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The use of evidence in decision-making
during public health emergencies. Stockholm: ECDC; 
Stockholm, July 
ISBN: ----
DOI: ./
Catalogue number: TQ----EN-N
© European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, 
Cover picture: © ThinkStock
Reproduction is authorised, provided the source is acknowledged.
For any use or reproduction of photos or other material that is not under the EU copyright, permission must be
sought directly from the copyright holders.

ii

TECHNICAL REPORT

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

Contents
Abbreviations ............................................................................................................................................... iv
Executive summary ........................................................................................................................................
 Background ................................................................................................................................................
 Evidence and decision-making ......................................................................................................................
What is ‘evidence’? ...................................................................................................................................
Why is evidence important? .......................................................................................................................
What is evidence-based decision-making? ...................................................................................................
Who are the decision makers? ...................................................................................................................
What is known about evidence use in decision-making? ...............................................................................
What is known about decision-making during public health emergencies? ......................................................
 Barriers to evidence-based decision-making during public health emergencies ..................................................
Uncertainty ..............................................................................................................................................
Time pressure ..........................................................................................................................................
Sociopolitical factors..................................................................................................................................
Pressure from neighbouring countries .........................................................................................................
Economic interests ....................................................................................................................................
Communication challenges ........................................................................................................................
Institutional settings .................................................................................................................................
Community engagement ...........................................................................................................................
 Modes of knowledge transition .....................................................................................................................
Boundary organisations .............................................................................................................................
Networks .................................................................................................................................................
Expanding expert influence and engagement ..............................................................................................
Enhancing knowledge access .....................................................................................................................
 Options for further action........................................................................................................................... 
Strengthen knowledge transfer ................................................................................................................ 
Foster networking between actors and disciplines ...................................................................................... 
Develop knowledge base on evidence uptake in decision-making ................................................................ 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................................. 
References .................................................................................................................................................. 
Annex . List of participants .......................................................................................................................... 

iii

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

Abbreviations
AAR

After-action review

EC

European Commission

ECDC

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control

EEA

European Economic Area

EPIET

European Programme for Intervention Epidemiology Training

EU

European Union

EVIPNet

Evidence-informed policy network

GPP

General preparedness plan

HIV

Human Immunodeficiency Virus

HSC

Health Security Committee

MMR

Measles, mumps, rubella vaccine

NFP

National focal point

OCP

Operational contact points

RRA

Rapid risk assessment

RHM

Roma health mediators

TBE

Tick-borne encephalitis

WHO

World Health Organization

UN

United Nations

UNAIDS

Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS

iv

TECHNICAL REPORT

TECHNICAL REPORT

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

Executive summary
Public health institutes and centres for disease control are responsible for safeguarding national health security and
generating evidence to inform national health initiatives. This duty is most challenging during public health
emergencies, when time is limited, scientific uncertainties and political pressures are high, and irrefutable evidence
to support a decision may be lacking. In order for such decisions to be evidence-based, politicians need scientific
input from experts who understand public health risks and can frame evidence within the appropriate context.
However, the consensus from this workshop was that the process of including evidence in public health decisionmaking and policy is clearly not systematic and is complicated by many barriers. Moreover, many of today’s health
crises are cross-border, and European legislation, such as Decision //EU of the European Parliament and
of the Council of  October  on serious cross-border threats to health, requires Member States to collaborate
in order to enhance the interoperability of evidence-based preparedness planning.
To enhance the impact of public health institutes’ work on decision-making for public health preparedness and
response, ECDC arranged an expert workshop on - December , which brought together public health
scientists, public practitioners with experience in managing health crises, and social and political scientists. This
workshop sought to identify and address the links between scientific evidence and decision-making in public health
emergencies, and to address the key challenges faced by public health experts when advising decision makers.
During the meeting, participants were asked to present research findings or real-world examples focussing on the
following themes: identification of major barriers to the acceptance and use of scientific and technical evidence in
decision-making during public health emergencies; lessons learned from past outbreaks; enhancement of
knowledge translation (i.e. the transfer of technical knowledge to decision makers) and engagement of experts in
decision-making processes, and recommendations to ECDC and public health institutes on how to overcome
barriers to evidence-based decision-making. There are numerous barriers to the acceptance and use of scientific
and technical evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies and these include the challenges of
accounting for uncertainties and political factors; communication of complex scientific information to decision
makers, and the effects of different institutional contexts on evidence uptake.
Mechanisms and actions identified during the workshop for overcoming barriers to evidence-based decision-making
included strengthening knowledge transfer; improving networking between actors and disciplines, and developing
effective approaches for promoting the uptake of evidence in public health decision-making. The social and political
science perspective should be included in these activities to provide a more comprehensive view of the challenges
to decision-making during public health emergencies.



Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

TECHNICAL REPORT

 Background
Evidence-based decision-making is central to public health: public health institutes and national centres for disease
control are tasked with supporting governments in developing evidence-informed action. This responsibility is most
challenging during a public health emergency, when time is limited, scientific uncertainties and political pressures
tend to be high, and irrefutable evidence may be lacking.
The relationship between the evidence provided by experts and the decisions ultimately taken is complex. Existing
literature is limited and suggests that crisis management decisions are not always evidence-based, which can result
in public criticism and scrutiny. Conversely, public criticism and scrutiny may lead to crisis management decisions
being taken that are not evidence-based. To enhance the impact of work done by public health institutes on
decision-making for public health preparedness and response, it is necessary to better understand the mechanisms
through which scientific evidence feeds into decision-making processes during emergencies and the context in
which these mechanisms operate.
In the context of a public health emergency, there are three common challenges to evidence-based decisionmaking in terms of response action during disease outbreak:
•
•
•

obstacles or barriers (e.g. ranging from uncertainty concerning risks, to insufficient medication or mistrust in
government that ultimately shape decisions and response measures
variability in how decision makers (and the stakeholders to whom they are accountable) interpret and apply
evidence; and
decision-making during public health emergencies may be constrained because decision makers are often
facing competing demands on their time, thereby limiting their ability to consider and act upon the available
evidence.

To tackle these challenges and to further examine barriers to and facilitators of evidence-based decision-making
while identifying priority areas where ECDC can positively influence the process for public health experts, an expert
workshop (~ participants) was convened at ECDC’s premises in Stockholm on – December . The meeting
consisted of both plenary and group working sessions focussing on four key questions:
•
•
•
•

What are the major barriers to evidence-based decision-making during public health emergencies?
What can be learned from measures implemented in past infectious disease outbreaks?
How can public health experts better facilitate knowledge translation  and engage in decision-making
processes?
What kind of support and guidance do Member States need to overcome barriers to evidence-based
decision-making?

These questions are the focus of the current technical report which summarises the main conclusions from the
expert workshop. To provide context, a summary of current knowledge on decision-making during crises is
provided, including what is known about evidence uptake during emergencies, and the cultural differences
between the science and policy domains. The body of the report presents the major barriers to evidence-based
decision-making identified through the workshop, followed by brief summaries of ‘lessons learned’ from four
different Member States and suggested mechanisms for knowledge translation of scientific evidence into health
policy. The report concludes with a list of options for further action generated by the workshop.
The text in this technical report is based on expert presentations, oral discussion, and summaries of group work.
The workshop was conducted following the Chatham House Rule  and statements are therefore not attributed to
individual participants.



Knowledge translation: the dynamic interface linking health information and research with policy and practice.

The Chatham House Rule: ‘When a meeting, or part thereof, is held under the Chatham House Rule, participants are free to use
the information received, but neither the identity nor the affiliation of the speaker(s), nor that of any other participant, may be
revealed.’ http://www.chathamhouse.org/chatham-house-rule




TECHNICAL REPORT

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

 Evidence and decision-making
To enable a fruitful dialogue on major barriers and facilitators to evidence-based decision-making, the workshop
began with a discussion of how evidence is defined and used, what constitutes primary sources of evidence, why
evidence is valuable, and what is known on the role of evidence in decision-making.

What is ‘evidence’?
In , WHO’s Regional Office for Europe adopted an initial broad definition of evidence as ‘findings from
research and other knowledge that may serve as a useful basis for decision-making in public health and healthcare’
[]. While literature on the use of evidence in public health emergencies is limited, one presenter discussed work
that reviewed the types and sources of evidence. Types of evidence in the context of public health emergencies
include peer-reviewed scientific research articles, but also exist in the form of local data, surveys, surveillance data,
guidelines and assessments. Sources of evidence are varied and range from published resources, organisations and
media to people. In one study it was claimed that local data (e.g. epidemiological, historical, qualitative and
interpersonal information) was recognised as a preferred form of evidence among policy-makers, while informal
information (e.g. from colleagues and friends) was also seen as an influential source of evidence []. Thus, what
counts as evidence is context-dependent and is often broader than the knowledge produced through ‘scientific
method’.

Why is evidence important?
The first guiding principle in the WHO Regional Office for Europe’s ‘Action plan to strengthen the use of evidence,
information and research for policy-making’ is that ‘evidence comes first: decisions should be based first and
foremost on the best available evidence’ []. Experts agreed that scientific evidence can provide knowledge during
public health emergencies that enables progress towards improved outcomes, reducing morbidity and mortality, as
well as the cost of relief efforts. The need for evidence comes from the moral and pragmatic obligation to ensure
that humanitarian action during crises is the best possible []. However, some participants argued that the public
health sector appears to place a higher self-imposed threshold on the quality and quantity of evidence needed to
make decisions than other sectors (e.g. natural disasters, traffic). This in turn can complicate engagement with
decision makers, particularly during public health emergencies.

What is evidence-based decision-making?
Evidence-based decision-making has been defined as the taking of policy decisions based on the best available
evidence through a process which is systematic and transparent []. While scientific evidence provides knowledge
typically produced through explicit and validated methodologies, the evidence is not necessarily used consistently
to steer political choices. Evidence use can be challenged by pre-existing bias, subjected to opportunistic use, or
used selectively to obtain perceived added value. In practice, participants argued that the information giving rise to
decisions in a complex crisis situation is a combination of scientific and non-scientific.

Who are the decision makers?
As the workshop focused on decision-making during infectious disease health crises, the decision makers of
interest are likely to be those with the authority in their country to implement specific infectious disease control
measures. In general, more routine measures will be the concern of decision makers situated in national institutes
of public health. For decisions that are more political in scope - such as school closures or the withdrawal of food
products during an outbreak of a food-borne disease - the decision makers are probably representatives from
national or local government (e.g. Ministry of Health, Education, Civil Protection) or from authorised regulatory
bodies (e.g. food safety authorities). As a result of the variety of decision-making contexts and structures across
Europe, and the fact that much of the existing literature on evidence-based decision-making related to public
health has tended to focus on non-crisis situations, this report seeks to establish generally applicable insights that
emerged from the workshop (i.e. insights most relevant for officials working in national and international public
health and/or disease control agencies.)

What is known about evidence use in decision-making?
While the gap between evidence and policy is apparent, few studies exist that examine the use of evidence in
decision-making during crisis management of public health emergencies. The draft findings from a scoping review
of available literature were presented during the workshop []. The aim of the review was to improve



Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

TECHNICAL REPORT

understanding of how scientific evidence feeds into decision-making processes. The literature search confirmed
that scientific knowledge and expert advice clearly play a role in decision-making, but many elements complicate
the ultimate impact of evidence in policy-making. Scientific uncertainty emerged as a major issue affecting
decisions during public health emergencies. Factors other than science that influence decision-making include past
experiences, relationships between key stakeholders, media, political climate and context, and reputation. While
science is an important factor, some participants concurred that existing studies do not clarify the method or
effectiveness of evidence use or the subsequent knowledge translation in public health emergencies [].
Furthermore, the extent to which evidence is a driver of policy decisions is difficult to assess due to the overarching
complexity of public health emergencies.
Although the scoping review provides some insight, it indicates evidence is not systematically inserted into policy,
so questions still remain as to how experts can promote good governance of evidence in public health
emergencies. It is interesting to note that WHO recently published an action plan to strengthen the use of evidence
[]. Workshop participants agreed that legitimate, strong evidence should provide the basis for a political
discussion involving credibility and confidence, but useable evidence is a combination of social and technical
expertise.

What is known about decision-making during public health
emergencies?
Scientific research can add significant value to decisions during public health emergencies by providing evidence to
characterise threats and forecast outcomes. However, the equally powerful push and pull of other factors informing
decision-making imply that the role and impact of scientific evidence in public health policy decisions is not always
consistent or systematic. One reason for this challenge may be that experts and decision makers do different types
of work.
Participants argued that national public health recommendations are not exclusively guided by scientific knowledge,
but are influenced by political and societal imperatives. For example, this is the case for EU Member States and
partner countries that are democratic countries where politicians are elected officials. Decision- and policy-makers
have an enormous responsibility for managing the national economy, health and security in the best interests of
their citizens. As one presenter explained, this entails weighing up perspectives and values to legitimise good
decisions, heeding the opinions of public and private stakeholders, and taking action in a timely, appropriate
manner. During public health emergencies, a series of adaptive decisions may often be required to meet changing
circumstances during response operations [] []. However, the way in which decisions are made – i.e. who,
when, and in what timeframe – can differ widely. Without effective exposure and knowledge translation to decision
makers, scientific evidence may have marginal political influence, particularly when in competition with other
factors. During the workshop it was suggested that technical experts are often reluctant to ‘simplify’ scientific
findings because doing so tends to mask the related uncertainties and assumptions. In addition, scientists might
disagree about the interpretation of uncertain data, further complicating the provision of scientific advice.
During the workshop, the consensus was that scientific knowledge is the key to situational awareness during public
health emergencies. Nevertheless, an intrinsic difference in culture between taking action (the realm of decision
makers) and gathering information (the realm of risk assessors) was acknowledged. In order to bridge the gap
between these two realms, it is crucial to improve understanding of the supply and demand for science, both from
decision makers’ and risk assessment experts’ perspectives.
Public health emergencies are states that impose an imminent threat caused by a disease or infectious agent [].
As suggested during the meeting, public health emergencies may be defined as having several phases: the
characterisation of the incident, risk assessment, response measures and the political decisions that ensue. The
knowledge of scientific experts, when used effectively, plays an important role in the process of broadening
understanding and improving preparedness for future risk. However, there are specific challenges in preparedness
and response to emergencies for the public health sector. One major challenge is the invisible nature of many
public health threats, in particular communicable disease threats. While natural disasters impose risks that are
highly visible, microbial agents or chemical attacks may not be as apparent to other stakeholders. In addition, a
number of public health emergencies are cross-border events that affect different groups and sectors and require a
much larger, coordinated effort to contain and eliminate. Moreover, with changing and unpredictable social and
political factors [], the standard preparedness and response activities of the past now require renewed attention
to to address novel threats which are exacerbated by factors such as public mistrust and the spread of
misinformation, as has been the case with vaccine hesitancy [a].



TECHNICAL REPORT

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

 Barriers to evidence-based decisionmaking during public health emergencies
The use of scientific evidence in the development of health decisions and policy depends on many factors beyond
technical knowledge translation. How policy makers ultimately arrive at a conclusion can be based on a
constellation of available evidence, but likely influenced by a multitude of contextual factors and pressures. The
expert consultation discussed determinants that influence decision-making, and how these factors can be barriers
to the use of scientific evidence, as well as threats to good governance.

Uncertainty
Novel public health events are often surrounded by great uncertainty. Uncertainty challenges political decisionmaking contexts, as the available scientific evidence might be irrelevant, unclear, ambiguous, or unhelpful [].
The pervasive theme of uncertainty appears to underlie many of the barriers identified during the workshop.
Decisions must be adaptive during crisis management, and sufficient evidence is not always available. Scientific
uncertainty appears to result in three outcomes (not mutually exclusive) – use of best available evidence, reversion
to preparedness plans, or action based upon the precautionary principle []. Under time pressure, lack of
evidence can drive the transformation to what has been referred to as ‘post-normal science’ or ‘mode- knowledge’
(Figure ) [], in which both the decision stakes and uncertainties are high, and decisions tend to be made on
extrapolated data or historical information which may not be particularly well-suited to the emergency at hand.
One presenter suggested that reactions following the nuclear disaster in Fukushima reflected mode- knowledge,
as the initial response was influenced by the radiation disasters of Nagasaki and Hiroshima because the novelty of
the event exceeded the capacity of existing evidence [].
Even in cases where scientific evidence exists, an understanding of the risks posed by a given disease outbreak can
evolve rapidly, thereby challenging decision makers to keep abreast of and respond to new evidence. Meanwhile,
evidence on the utility of response measures may evolve more slowly. The decision to implement response
measures may depend not only on evidence concerning the disease but also on the perceived severity of disease
risk which, to some extent is subjective and culturally determined. For example, during the Zika outbreak in ,
knowledge of the links between Zika and congenital malformations developed quickly []. However, according to
some meeting participants, evidence on the utility of appropriate response measures, such as the provision of
travel advice, was lacking. Nevertheless, due to the novelty of the event there was pressure on public health
agencies to provide travel advice so this tended to be based upon precautionary principles.
Finally, the interpretation of evidence by both experts and decision makers may also serve as a source of
uncertainty. There may be variance both within groups and between them: variations in expert judgments may
exist, as there might be disagreement among decision makers and between experts and decision makers.
Participants agreed that because experts are human beings who make individual interpretations, evidence can also
carry a user opinion-bias, be context-sensitive, and even be based on inconsistent or poor methodology. Due to
these factors, experts can have different views, weakening the power of evidence due to lack of consensus among
the scientific community. Participants concurred that inconsistent or inappropriate use of evidence can contribute to
an erosion of trust between experts, decision makers and the wider public.

Time pressure
Time limitations for decision-making are a constant and unavoidable barrier to the use of evidence during a crisis.
Due to the rapid evolution and complexity of public health emergencies, decision makers are under pressure to
respond urgently and strategically to demonstrate capability and meet public health needs.
Elected officials have a formidable challenge in managing national economies, public health, and security as well as
a wide range of national or international issues (e.g. migration, urban growth or environmental disasters). Elected
decision makers often have to be briefed quickly with episodic input, and are forced to take quick decisions based
on an incomplete picture. Several participants noted that if evidence is lacking, decision makers may turn
elsewhere for rapid answers. Under pressure, leaders may consult their own networks of ‘experts’ (e.g. friends,
colleagues or other politicians) or take decisions influenced by their own cognitive biases or previous experiences.

Sociopolitical factors
Nowadays, the task of safeguarding public health is complicated by factors such as globalisation and extended
travel habits, high levels of inequality across Europe, climate change, and more frequently-occurring health crises
and natural disasters [a]. Evidence use in decision-making may be compromised by factors such as competing


Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

TECHNICAL REPORT

political demands, or stakeholder interests that may prioritise short-term response measures which are not
necessarily effective. In addition, addressing crises in a time of austerity with limited resources exacerbates the
pressure on politicians and decision makers, and compromises evidence use.

Pressure from neighbouring countries
Political reputation is also affected by decisions taken outside of countries, and the actions of other players on the
international stage, such as neighbouring countries or industries, can have an impact on the use of evidence for
decision-making. EU collaborative mechanisms also encourage sharing practices, which may place additional
pressure on policy-makers to take decisions in the absence of solid scientific facts. Decision //EU
specifically aims to encourage the interoperability of national preparedness plans. This is important, as when a
decision is taken by one country during a public health emergency this may impose pressure on neighbouring
countries to do the same. Yet, even with the same evidence, the advice of experts from neighbouring countries can
lead to different conclusions, as was seen in one study on decision-making in the context of the HN influenza
pandemic. [a].

Economic interests
The economic impact of outbreaks also provides some essential context. During many outbreaks, trade and
tourism fall sharply in affected areas, resulting in a substantial negative impact on the economy. This was evident
during the SARS outbreak in –, when countries were put under immense pressure to implement
measures to show that they were doing everything they could to become SARS-free.
The  Ebola outbreak in West Africa caused enormous economic losses to the region []. During the outbreak
even decisions taken on Ebola in Europe may have been affected by economic considerations. As one participant
pointed out, one EU Member State continued to have direct flights to the affected areas in West Africa, and an
airline company put very heavy pressure on the airport authorities to institute entry screening, despite the lack of
evidence supporting such measures, so as to reassure the public.

Communication challenges
Lack of effective communication stands out as a significant barrier to use of evidence in decision-making from
many different perspectives. Although communication plays an essential role at all levels of public health
emergency response, two major themes emerged: suboptimal links between scientific experts and decision
makers, and the potentially distorting role of news and social media sources. With regard to suboptimal links,
participants at the meeting argued that scientists fail to consider the time demands placed on decision makers:
during an emergency they are likely to have only a very limited amount of time to assess scientific evidence.
It was suggested by one researcher that decision makers have specific needs during a public health emergency.
They include:
•
•
•
•

sourcing the best available knowledge from trustworthy institutions and experts
expert consensus
transparency; and
maintaining the credibility of their institutions.

One participant suggested that, to meet these needs, decision makers look for academic experts who embrace a
larger perspective, and who understand how health fits into other systems such as urbanisation, migration, travel
or climate change. However, every decision maker almost certainly prefers a specific type of evidence, and it would
be hazardous to generalise.
Decision-making is not linear [], and multiple participants argued that decision makers’ demands for scientific
knowledge can vary, depending on cultural differences, resource availability, or the specific phase of the crisis
management cycle. To improve the translation of evidence into decisions, scientific experts must understand these
needs and be transparent during interactions: bridging the gap between evidence and policy requires an effective
translation of knowledge.
One presenter argued that the media could distort the public’s understanding of the risk level of an event, quoting
the unpredicted press interest in recent monkey pox cases in one EU Member State by way of example. False and
unscientific information sources, including the opinions expressed by celebrities, in blog posts, and on social media,
can sway the public view which, in turn, can influence the way in which decision makers react during crises.
Participants agreed that certain media create challenges to establishing a public consensus on scientific findings, as
there is always an ‘expert’ available who is willing to contradict or question both evidence and decision-making.



TECHNICAL REPORT

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

Institutional settings
Institutional silos limit evidence sharing due to limited collaboration between divisions or disciplines. Political
organisation can dictate the placement of expert networks in different regions. Decision makers can be elected
officials, emergency managers, private entities, and even members of the public, all of whom have varying
proximity and exposure to scientific expertise, evidence, and policy. For example, a decision by a national
government to distribute a stock of vaccines triggers a series of events and involves decision makers at many levels
of distribution. Decision makers at these levels can have dissimilar goals, incentives and risk preferences, which are
not always clear to public health experts. As argued during the workshop, different response options may be due
to variations in resources, budget, objectives, and decision-making mandates (e.g. recommendations for school
closures during the  HN outbreak in the US []). Changes in the individuals responsible for decisionmaking - whether due to reorganisation, staff turnover or as a result of elections - can disrupt established
communication channels, or result in a loss of corporate memory, or changes to the legal framework related to
public health emergency response. Any or all of these results may require renewed or repeated evidence-sharing.

Community engagement
Lack of active or appropriate involvement with or among other sectors (e.g. environment, social science) can also
be a barrier to appropriate and effective evidence use in decision-making during public health emergencies.
Challenges arise in discussions regarding the involvement of community players to maintain transparency, while
compartmentalising this involvement in order to minimise complexity. Decision makers in one EU Member State
realised the importance of collaborating with the community and other economically vital sectors following a
Q fever and tick-borne encephalitis outbreak in the community in July  [].



Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

TECHNICAL REPORT

 Modes of knowledge transition
Knowledge translation is essential for ensuring that evidence is effectively integrated into decision-making contexts.
It can be defined as ‘the dynamic interface that links health information and research with policy and practice’ that
‘provide[s] an array of tools to researchers and decision makers to foster evidence-informed policy’ []. The
workshop discussed potential mechanisms to enhance the use of evidence in political decision-making. The
effective implementation of evidence depends on the context or environment where evidence is discussed, the
nature of evidence availability, and how scientific knowledge is facilitated by experts.
The uptake of scientific knowledge requires credibility of, and trust in scientific institutions, and it requires the
effective translation of sometimes complex scientific messages into information that is timely and actionable for
decision makers. Workshop participants suggested that trust in public health and biomedical sciences is generally
strong in comparison with many other policy domains, particularly during events such as infectious disease
outbreaks.

Boundary organisations
Boundary organisations work to enable a bridge between scientific and policy domains []. As one presenter put
it, these organisations have a key role in building crisis management competencies, bringing different viewpoints
together to broaden perceptions and understand biases, and suggesting options for countermeasures to best meet
the challenges of unexpected events. ECDC and national centres for disease control may be considered boundary
organisations insofar as one of their important roles is to combine surveillance data, scientific evidence, and
response capacity with situational context in order to provide evidence on risk and response for decision makers.
Given that ECDC’s mandate is a product of political decision-making, participants argued that ECDC should
incorporate information about relevant policy initiatives and decision-making contexts into its planning processes in
order to more successfully integrate science and policy [] [] []. The very nature of boundary organisations
places them in a unique position to help enhance the uptake of scientific evidence.

Networks
Networks can serve as knowledge translation platforms, which can facilitate evidence-transformation into policy
through enhanced communication between experts and decision makers. Networks create an important
environment to break down silos, cultivate relationships, build trust, and facilitate transparency. For example,
assembly of a cross-sectoral network can bring together an expanded community with input from different
backgrounds to foster accumulation of best-known evidence, peer-support and exchange of experience and to
provide improved opportunity for consensus and accountability.
One example is the Evidence-Informed Policy Network [], or EVIPNet, established by WHO with the aim of
promoting partnerships between researchers and policy-makers. EVIPNet aims to bridge the evidence-policy gap in
a systematic way through support of capacity building, development of national health policy, workshops and
evidence briefs to present evidence in the context of the policy problem and highlight potential impact and barriers.
At the workshop, it was noted that one European government’s decision to implement a sugar tax in  was
based on one such evidence brief [].Publications by WHO [] and others [] [] provide examples of how
networks facilitate the use of evidence in policy-making.
ECDC already interacts with EU/EEA Member States through networks and partnerships, which serve as gateways
for collaboration with national public health institutes. For example, ECDC has public health networks consisting of
national focal points (NFPs) and operational contact points (OCPs). These networks are a key source of advice and
guidance for work in the area of preparedness, while also being the main target group for ECDC outputs [].
ECDC also collaborates with decision makers (the Health Security Committee through the European Commission)
by providing technical support. One way of strengthening knowledge translation is to further foster relationships
within these networks.

Expanding expert influence and engagement
Developing and applying an understanding of political dynamics and the supply and demand for science in
decision-making is one way to optimise the uptake of science in decision-making processes []. Some of the
actions highlighted by the workshop participants were to identify an entry point to policy discussions, to act with
transparency, to clearly communicate uncertainties, and to frame scientific evidence into broader decision-making
contexts. In some instances, experts may seek to develop and advocate for policy positions [] or offer policy
implications from their research []. Broader engagement with different audiences requires the communication of
messages in a novel and simplified manner.



TECHNICAL REPORT

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

Enhancing knowledge access
On-line platforms can facilitate access to scientific knowledge and knowledge translation. Examples within the
health sector include the Healthcare Information for All - Library Information Services (HIFA LIS) project [], the
Cochrane Collaboration [] and Evidence Aid (humanitarian risk reduction) []. The Knowledge to Action
framework [], and the PARiHS (Promoting Action on Research Implementation) framework [] are also
resources that can facilitate knowledge translation of scientific evidence.



Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

TECHNICAL REPORT

 Options for further action
The concluding sessions of the workshop aimed to identify actions that could be undertaken to tackle barriers to
evidence-based decision-making, improve knowledge translation, and enhance preparedness and response
activities during public health emergencies, both nationally and internationally. These potential actions are intended
to be relevant to any public health institutes that seek to enhance the uptake of evidence in decision-making
processes and during emergencies.

Strengthen knowledge transfer
ECDC can best support Member States in handling uncertainty and combating misinformation by building
legitimacy and trust of evidence, experts and scientific institutions. Public health agencies should consider the
following:
Training of public health experts (e.g. epidemiologists, information managers)
To develop decision-support competencies by having a more thorough understanding of political contexts
and the needs of decision makers.
To effectively present the evidence and communicate uncertainties so as to inform decision-making.
Training could be through seminars, workshops, summer/winter schools, and through integrated training
(e.g. ECDC’s fellowship programme in field epidemiology []).

•
•
•

Provide evidence base for evidence uptake
It is interesting to note that WHO recently published an action plan to strengthen the use of evidence [].
Execution could include:
highlighting instances where scientific advice was not effectively heeded, for example, as outlined by the
European Environment Agency in their reports on ‘Late Lessons from Early Warnings’ ; and
support development of guidance on appropriate evidence usage by decision makers.

•
•

Foster networking between actors and disciplines
To strengthen trust between scientists and decision makers and better enable consensus on evidence use, ECDC
could consider the following measures:
Enhance existing and build new networks to strengthen mutual understanding and improve situational
awareness of both public health and decision-making contexts. Strategies could include:
fostering networks combining public health experts with social and political scientists, decision makers,
communicators and other stakeholders
identifying how a diversity of expertise and roles is necessary to take complex decisions and build
understanding of the contexts and constraints under which each group operates; and
enhancing and broadening the activities of existing networks such as ECDC’s NFPs and EVIPNet Europe.

•
•
•

Incorporate social and political science perspectives to strengthen awareness of the role and limitations of
science in decision-making. Strategies could include:
Enhancing scientists’ understanding of decision-making contexts, and decision makers’ understanding of
scientific methods and uncertainties.
Considering public perception and acceptance of evidence-supported response measures so as to tailor
response and risk communication (e.g. vaccine recommendations should consider vaccine hesitancy against
vaccine efficacy).

•
•

Establish dialogue between experts and key decision makers during peace-time – to what extent should public
health agencies ‘advocate’ rather than simply presenting ‘facts’?
Develop consensus and guidance on how scientists could engage as advisors in decision-making processes.
Identify the types of decision-making requirements that exist during emergencies and identifying ways to
quickly establish scientific evidence to address these requirements (e.g. developing rapid research
protocols; establishing real-time mathematical modelling initiatives, etc.).
Providing support for ‘storytelling’ (i.e. simplifying complex scientific messages) to reach political decision
makers and provide a reliable depiction of population health.

•
•
•



https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/late-lessons-



TECHNICAL REPORT

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

Support community engagement projects, and use these cases to share best practices and facilitate contextual
adaptation. Strategies could include:
•
•

highlighting local practices and evidence generation to promote trust and suppress scepticism and rumours
among the public; and
using local, community facilitators (e.g. health mediators) as a good model of interaction between experts
and political decision makers.

Develop knowledge base on evidence uptake in decisionmaking
To address the challenge of evidence use in the context of rapid public health emergency development, focus can
be placed on greater availability of open-access resources, strengthening documentation (such as rapid risk
assessments and after-action reviews [AARs]) and providing guidance on general preparedness and best practice.
Share case studies as examples of best practice and valuable learning opportunities:
•
•
•

Open-access case studies, success stories or policy failures where the connection between evidence-base
and decision-making has been addressed can help promote good governance during public health
emergencies.
Contextualisation is crucial, so availability of case studies with different contexts (e.g. school closures, mass
quarantines, governance context) is essential.
Encourage dissemination of recently-published ECDC recommendations on best practice [].

Encourage AARs as source of transparent data that provide reflection on past events and help drive planning for
future outbreaks. Suggestions to enhance AARs include:
•
•

•

establishing a platform where countries can share experiences would facilitate exchange of examples of
evidence availability and provide information on how uptake and utilisation has had an impact on policy
outcomes
sharing mistakes as lessons learned to contribute to transparency; and
including modules within AAR protocols that specifically examine evidence usage during emergencies.

Perform and publish literature reviews on how evidence is used during public health emergencies (already
initiated by ECDC).
•

Enhance knowledge of how political moods impact evidence use and response to public health emergencies
and how public health research relates to potential policy conclusions.

Further develop core competencies of public health in the European countries including:
•
•

support to Member States in designing national preparedness plans and ensuring their interoperability; and
enhancing general preparedness plans (GPP) by building modules that include disciplinary integration of
sectors, support for communication strategies, and an international perspective to enable consistency with
neighbours.

Monitor social media. Public sentiment can affect decision-making and the acceptance of emergency response
measures. Steps to monitor social media and attempt to assess public sentiment include:
•
•

examining engagement on Twitter and Facebook (e.g. posts, shares, and ‘likes’) as a measure of impact;
and
identifying and examining strategies for rumour management.



Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

TECHNICAL REPORT

Conclusion
Scientific knowledge is essential for guiding decision-making during public health emergencies. Nevertheless, it
should be acknowledged that scientific evidence may be just one of many considerations guiding decision-making.
Understanding the contexts in which decision-making occurs and the barriers to evidence uptake is a necessary
first step for sustained public health action to enhance evidence usage. There are opportunities to overcome
existing barriers by enhancing knowledge transfer and pursuing activities which strengthen links between technical
experts and decision makers. Concrete actions to overcome barriers include establishing bridging networks to
optimise evidence uptake and incorporating perspectives from the social and political sciences so as to develop
more sophisticated approaches to knowledge transfer.



TECHNICAL REPORT

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

References
.

WHO Regional Office for Europe. Evidence Informed Policy Making. . [Internet] Available from:
http://www.euro.who.int/en/data-and-evidence/evidence-informed-policy-making/about-us

.

Oliver K, de Vocht F. Defining 'evidence' in public health: a survey of policymakers' uses and preferences.
Eur J Public Health,  May ;(suppl_):-.

.

WHO Regional Office for Europe. Action plan to strengthen the use of evidence. Copenhagen: WHO Regional
Office for Europe; . Available from:
http://euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file///wde_EIPActionPlan_.pdf

.

Blanchet K, Allen C, Breckon J, Davies P, Duclos D, Jansen J, et al. Using Research Evidence in the
Humanitarian Sector: A practice guide. London: Evidence Aid, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine and Nesta (Alliance for Useful Evidence); . Available from:
http://www.allianceusefulevidence.org/assets///Evidence_Aid_Practice_Guide_pp_DIGITAL.pdf

.

Oxman AD, Lavis JN, Lewin S, Fretheim A. SUPPORT tools for evidence-informed health Policymaking
(STP) : What is evidence-informed policymaking? Health Res Policy Syst,  Dec .  (Suppl ): S.

.

Oliver K, Lorenc T, Innvær S. New directions in evidence-based policy research: a critical analysis of the
literature, Health Research Policy and Systems . :.

.

World Health Organization. Glossary of humanitarian terms. Geneva: WHO; . Available from:
http://www.who.int/hac/about/reliefweb-aug.pdf

.

Stapleton P. From Mad Cows to GMOs: The Side Effects of Modernization. Eur J Risk Regul. . ():.

a.

Suk JE, Lopalco P. Pastore Celentano L. Hesitancy, trust and individualism in vaccination decision-making.
PLoS Curr.  February ;.

.

Lurie N, Wasserman J, Nelson C. Public Health Preparedness: Evolution Or Revolution? Health Affairs. ;
:. Available from: http://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/./hlthaff...

. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Public health emergency preparedness: Core
competencies for EU Member States. [Internet]. Stockholm: ECDC; . Available from:
http://ecdc.europa.eu/publications-data/public-health-emergency-preparedness-core-competencies-eumember-states
. Miller C. Hybrid management: Boundary organizations, science policy, and environmental governance in the
climate regime. Science Technology and Human Values. .
. Lidskog R, Sundqvist G (eds). Governing the air: The dynamics of science, policy, and citizen interaction,
. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. .
. Esguerra A, Beck S, Lidskog R. Stakeholder Engagement in the Making: IPBES Legitimization Politics. Glob
Environ Politics. ;():-.
. Gustafsson K, Lidskog R. Boundary organizations and environmental governance: Performance, institutional
design, and conceptual development. Clim Risk Manag. ;:-.
. Oliver K, Innvar S, Lorenc T, Woodman J, Thomas J. A systematic review of barriers to and facilitators of the
use of evidence by policymakers. BMC Health Serv Res.  Jan :.
. Salajan A, Tsolova S, Ciotti M, Suk JE. To what extent does evidence support decision-making during
infectious disease outbreaks? A scoping literature review. In preparation.
. Funtowitz S, Ravets J. Science for the post-normal age. Futures.  Sep:;:-.
. Pascale CM. Vernacular epistemologies of risk: The crisis in Fukushima. Curr Sociol.  Mar .();-.
a. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Understanding the socio-economic divide in
Europe – Background report – January . Paris: OECD; . Available from:
http://www.oecd.org/els/soc/cope-divide-europe--background-report.pdf
. Rojas DP, Dean NE, Yang Y, Kenah E, Quintero J, Tomasi S, et al. The epidemiology and transmissibility of
Zika virus in Girardot and San Andres island, Colombia, September  to January . Euro Surveill.
:(). Available from: http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=
a. Baekkeskov E. Same threat, different responses: Experts steering politicians and stakeholders in  HN
vaccination policy-making. Public Administration, February . [Internet].
http://doi.org/./padm.
. United Nations Development Group – Western and Central Africa. Socio-Economic Impact of Ebola Virus
Disease in West African Countries – A call for national and regional containment, recovery and prevention.
New York: UNSDG; . Available from: http://www.undp.org/content/dam/rba/docs/Reports/ebola-westafrica.pdf


Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

TECHNICAL REPORT

. Oliver K, Cairney P. A systematic review of the do’s and don’ts of engaging in policy. Palgrave
Communications, .:.
. Klaiman T, Kraemer J, Stoto M. Variability in school closure decisions in response to  HN: a qualitative
systems improvement analysis. BMC Public Health, .:.
. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Synergies in community and institutional public health
emergency preparedness for tick-borne diseases in the Netherlands. Stockholm: ECDC; . Available from:
http://ecdc.europa.eu/publications-data/synergies-community-and-institutional-public-health-emergencypreparedness-tick-
. Muscat M, Marinova L, Mankertz A, Gatcheva N, Mihneva Z, Santibanez S, et al. The measles outbreak in
Bulgaria, –: An epidemiological assessment and lessons learnt. Euro Surveill. ;():.
Available from: http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=
. National Network of Health Mediators – Bulgaria [Internet]. Sofia: NNHM; . Available from:
http://www.zdravenmediator.net/en/
. Stefanelli P, Miglietta A, Pezzoti P, Fazio C, Neri A, Vacca P, et al. Increased incidence of invasive
meningococcal disease of serogroup C/clonal complex , Tuscany, Italy,  to . Euro Surveill.
;(). Available from: http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=
. Dettori M, Arru B, Azara A, Piana A, Mariotti G, Camerada MV, et al. In the Digital Era, Is Community Outrage
a Feasible Proxy Indicator of Emotional Epidemiology? The Case of Meningococcal Disease in Sardinia, Italy.
Int J Environ Res Public Health,  Jul ;().
. Miglietta A, Fazio C, Neri A, Pezzotti P, Innocenti F, Azzari C, et al. Interconnected clusters of invasive
meningococcal disease due to Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C ST- (cc), involving bisexuals and men
who have sex with men, with discos and gay-venues hotspots of transmission. Euro Surveill.
 Aug;(). Available from: http://www.eurosurveillance.org/content/./.ES....
. Paraskevis D, Nikolopoulos G, Tsiara C, Paraskeva D, Antoniadou A, Lazanas M, et al. HIV- outbreak among
injecting drug users in Greece, : a preliminary report. Euro Surveill.  Sep ;(). Available from:
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=
. World Health Organization. Evidence Informed Policy Network. Fact sheet: What is EVIPNet? Available from:
http://www.who.int/evidence/resources/what-is-EVIPNet_.pdf
. Evidence-informed Policy Network. Evidence brief for policy. Reducing the consumption of sugar-sweetened
beverages and their negative health impact in Estonia (). Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe;
.
. International Development Research Centre. Turning health research into policy [Internet]. Ottawa: IRDC;
. Available from: https://www.idrc.ca/en/project/turning-health-research-policy
. Ongolo-Zogo P, Lavis JN, Tomson G, Sewankambo NK. Initiatives supporting evidence informed health
system policymaking in Cameroon and Uganda: a comparative historical case study. BMC Health Serv Res,
 Nov ;;.
. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. ECDC's partnerships and networks [Internet].
Stockholm: ECDC; . Available from: http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/about-us/ecdcs-partnerships-and-networks
. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva:
UNISDR; . Available from: http://www.unisdr.org/we/coordinate/sendai-framework
. Oliver K, Cairney P. How Should Academics Engage in Policymaking to Achieve Impact? Polit Stud Rev. .
. Tilly H, Shaxson L, Young J, Rea J, Ball L.  things to know about how to influence policy with research.
London: Overseas Development Institute; . Available from:
http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-documents/.pdf
. Goodwin M. How academics can engage with policy:  tips for a better conversation. The Guardian, 
March .
. Healthcare Information For All. Library Information Services [Internet]. Available from:
http://www.hifa.org/projects/library-and-information-services
. Cochrane website. Available from: https://www.cochrane.org
. Evidence Aid website. Available from: http://www.evidenceaid.org
. Graham ID, Logan J, Harrison MB, Straus SE, Tetroe J, Caswell W, et al. Lost in knowledge translation: Time
for a map? J Contin Educ Health Prof.  Winter;():-.
. National Collaborating Centre for Methods and Tools. PARiHS framework for implementing research into
practice. Hamilton: McMaster University; . Available from: http://www.nccmt.ca/knowledgerepositories/search/



TECHNICAL REPORT

Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Call for application for cohort  ECDC Fellowship
Programme EPIET and EUPHEM paths, EU-track [Internet]. Stockholm: ECDC;  [cited  July ].
Available from: http://ecdc.europa.eu/about-us/work-us/call-ecdc-fellowship-programme-epiet-and-euphempaths
. World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe. EUR/RC/ – Action plan to strengthen the use of
evidence, information and research for policy-making in the WHO European Region. Copenhagen: WHO
Regional Office for Europe. Available from:
http://euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file///wde_EIPActionPlan_.pdf
. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Best practice recommendations for conducting afteraction reviews to enhance public health preparedness. Stockholm: ECDC; . Available from:
http://ecdc.europa.eu/publications-data/best-practice-recommendations-public-health-preparedness
. National Institute for Public Health and the Environment. European Multiple Environmental Threats
Emergency Network [Internet]. Bilthoven: RIVM; . Available from: http://www.rivm.nl/en/aboutrivm/mission-and-strategy/international-affairs/international-projects/emetnet
. European Parliament, European Council. Decision No. //EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council of  October  on serious cross-border threats to health and repealing Decision No //EC
(Text with EEA relevance). Off J Eur U.  Nov ;L :-. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/preparedness_response/docs/decision_serious_crossborder_thre
ats__en.pdf
. Knowledgeplatforms.nl [Internet]. The Hague: The Foundation for International Development Publications;
. Available from: http://www.knowledgeplatforms.nl
. United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals [Internet]. Geneva: WHO;  [cited  July ].
Available from: http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals



Use of evidence in decision-making during public health emergencies

Annex . List of participants
Name

Country

Abeysinghe, Sudeepa
Bynander, Fredrik
DeVries, Daniel
Kunchev, Angel
Gwyn, Prince Morris
Jacobi, André
Lopalco, Pierluigi
Nelson, Christopher
Oliver, Kathryn
Panagiotopoulos, Takis
Price, Charles
Regmi, Jetri
Rexroth, Ute
Reynders, Daniel
Rubin, Olivier
Sane, Jussi
Tomson, Göran
Vasconcelos, Paula

United Kingdom
Sweden
Netherlands
Bulgaria
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Italy
United States
United Kingdom
Greece
European Commission
WHO
Germany
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
Sweden
Portugal

ECDC Staff

Affiliation

Baka, Agoritsa
Barragan, Susana
Beauté, Julien
Cenciarelli, Orlando
Ciotti, Massimo
Murach-Ward, Friederike
Jansa, Josep
Pasi, Penttinen
Pommier, Jeanine
Riley, Paul
Salajan, Andreea
Suk, Jonathan
Takacs, Judit
Tsolova, Svetla
Zucs, Phillip

ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC
ECDC



TECHNICAL REPORT

European Centre for Disease
Prevention and Control (ECDC)

Subscribe to our publications
www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications

Gustav III:s Boulevard ,  Solna, Sweden

Contact us
publications@ecdc.europa.eu

Tel. + 
Fax + 
www.ecdc.europa.eu

Follow us on Twitter
@ECDC_EU

An agency of the European Union
www.europa.eu

Like our Facebook page
www.facebook.com/ECDC.EU

ECDC is committed to ensuring the transparency and independence of its work
In accordance with the Staff Regulations for Officials and Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Union and the ECDC
Independence Policy, ECDC staff members shall not, in the performance of their duties, deal with matters in which they may, directly or
indirectly, have a personal interest that could impair their independence. Declarations of interest must be received from any prospective
contractor before a contract can be awarded.
www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/aboutus/transparency

