ED ITORIAL

Underpromise, overdeliver

T

remdesivir, novel antivirals, and numerous antibodies.
These are exciting possibilities, but also extremely
speculative. Political overhyping of such approaches
is extremely dangerous—it risks creating false expectations and depleting drugs needed to treat diseases
for which they are approved. And it sets science up to
overpromise and underdeliver.
As for vaccines, we know so little about SARS-CoV-2.
Developing a vaccine could take at least a year and a
half—as many experts have suggested—or maybe won’t
happen at all. Fortunately, a clinical trial for a vaccine
is already underway in the United States, but the public must be told that these early vaccines may not work
or be safe—that this vaccine is only being tested for
safety, not efficacy, at this point.
Scientists involved in COVID-19
research know these caveats. But the
general public—who are agonizing
over how long this pandemic will
last, how it will affect the economy,
and whether they and their loved
ones will be safe—are looking for
hope wherever they can find it. If
science can deliver answers, public
trust in science could increase substantially (the high point for trust in
science in the United States was at
the end of World War II). But if the
scientific community contributes to
building up hope in the fight against
COVID-19, but then doesn’t deliver,
the consequences for science could
be dire, especially if politicians continue to amplify the
false hope irresponsibly.
When science addressed the HIV/AIDS crisis, it took
years of careful virology, drug development, and epidemiology. The global scientific assault on COVID-19
is faster, and as I see the research that comes to Science and that appears on preprint servers, I am hopeful that science will deliver on this challenge, too. But
I worry that engendering false hope will cause complacency that will deprive us of the time needed to find a
lasting solution. And I worry about lasting damage if
science overpromises.
Let’s underpromise. Let’s overdeliver

H. Holden Thorp
Editor-in-Chief,
Science journals.
hthorp@aaas.org;
@hholdenthorp

“…engendering
false hope
will cause…
lasting damage
if science
overpromises.”

PHOTO: CAMERON DAVIDSON

–H. Holden Thorp

Published online 23 March 2020; 10.1126/science.abb8492

SCIENCE sciencemag.org

27 MARCH 2020• VOL 367 ISSUE 6485

Published by AAAS

1405

Downloaded from http://science.sciencemag.org/ on March 28, 2020

he majority of crises that most of us have lived
through have not looked to science for immediate answers. In many cases, much of the scientific analysis came after the fact—the effects of
climate change on extreme weather events; the
causes of nuclear accidents; and the virology of
outbreaks that were contained such as severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2002–2003 or
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) in 2012.
Now, science is being asked to provide a rapid solution
to a problem that is not completely described.
I am worried that science may end up overpromising on what can be delivered in response to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). This isn’t because
I think the scientific community
has bad intentions or will purposefully overhype anything, but because
of what science can report in real
time. It is difficult to share progress
with adequate caveats about how
long things might take or whether
they will work at all. The scientific
method is a very deliberate process
that has been honed over time: Basic
research, which describes the problem, is followed by applied research
that builds on that understanding.
Now, scientists are trying to do both
at the same time. This is not just
fixing a plane while it’s flying—it’s
fixing a plane that’s flying while its
blueprints are still being drawn.
On the testing side, polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
technology is allowing folks to know quickly whether they
are infected with SARS coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the
cause of COVID-19. However, a negative PCR test result
may lead a person to erroneously conclude that they’re in
the clear, which is a danger to controlling the spread. We
urgently need serology tests that show whether someone
has had the infection and recovered. And we must be
able to identify individuals who have some immunity to
SARS-CoV-2 because understanding their biology may
contribute to helping the world recover.
When it comes to drug trials, we’ve now seen the
first negative result on the lopinavir-ritonavir combination, which performed no better than placebo.
Efforts are underway to identify other possible drugs—

Underpromise, overdeliver
H. Holden Thorp

Science 367 (6485), 1405.
DOI: 10.1126/science.abb8492originally published online March 23, 2020

http://science.sciencemag.org/content/367/6485/1405

PERMISSIONS

http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of Service
Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of
Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works

Downloaded from http://science.sciencemag.org/ on March 28, 2020

ARTICLE TOOLS

