World Report

Venezuelan migrants “struggling to survive” amid COVID-19
Humanitarian organisations are concerned that border closures and health-care shortages are
amplifying the challenges posed by COVID-19. Joe Parkin Daniels reports from Bogotá.
The coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic is exacerbating
an already precarious health crisis
for Venezuelan migrants fleeing a
collapsed health system at home.
At the time of going to press, the
outbreak is continuing to spread in
Venezuela despite a military-enforced
quarantine.
Venezuela remains mired in economic
and social turmoil. Hyperinflation last
year reached 10 000%, according to
the central bank, while shortages in
basic foodstuffs and medical supplies
were already a daily reality. Hospitals
regularly facing power outages and
basic medical supplies—from latex
gloves to routine antibiotics—are often
hard to come by. 4·5 million people
have fled Venezuela in recent years,
including health workers and disease
specialists.
Most Venezuelan migrants cross
on foot into neigh­bouring Colombia,
which houses an estimated 1·4 million
Venezuelans. In Cúcuta, a city on
the Colombian side of the border, as
many as 40 000 Venezuelans arrived
daily until March 14, when Colombia
closed its borders in a bid to stem the
spread of COVID-19. Colombia had
306 confirmed cases of the disease,
with three deaths, as of March 24.
The seven official entry points along
the 1378-mile border remain closed,
although countless informal crossings
are still in use.
The International Rescue Committee,
a non-governmental organisation
(NGO) with a clinic for Venezuelan
migrants in Cúcuta, reports an
emerging crisis. “Needs are very
strongly felt here in terms of access to
health and other services”, said Minerva
Márquez, the NGO’s representative
in Cúcuta. “Migrants are struggling
to survive without soup kitchens
or any means of work. Few partner
www.thelancet.com Vol 395 March 28, 2020	

organisations are able to work at full
capacity either.”
The Colombian government has
returned a number of migrants to
Venezuela in response to the outbreak,
while permitting those with ongoing
medical treatments—including

“‘Needs are very strongly felt
here in terms of access to health
and other services‘“
dialysis—to cross into Colombia. It is
unclear how many people have been
returned or how many have able to
cross the border as medical exceptions;
humanitarian actors report that the
Colombian authorities are working on
a case-by-case basis.
The Pan American Health Organi­
zation announced on March 16 that
it will facilitate cooperation between
the two countries in battling the
spread of COVID-19 on the border,
despite the breakdown in diplomatic
relations a year ago.
Other NGOs have expressed con­
cerns about what effects the border
shutdown could have. Ellen Rymshaw,
Colombia’s head of mission at Médecins
Sans Frontières (MSF), said that fewer
patients have attended their clinics in
border provinces since the shutdown.
“We are also seeing an increase of
xenophobia and discrimination against
this population, which is falsely accused
of the spread of COVID-19 in the border
areas. MSF is extremely concerned that
the growing xenophobia toward the
Venezuelan community will prevent
access to basic medical services they so
desperately need.”
Both countries have also announced
strict quarantines, preventing many
of those wishing to return home
from doing so. Even if they could, the
Venezuelan health system continues
to buckle.

A survey of doctors by the local
Venezuelan NGO Médicos Unidos
found that only 25% of respondents
had reliable tap water in their hospitals
and clinics. 65% said they did not
have gloves, masks, soap, goggles, or
scrubs. At one of the country’s largest
hospitals, the University Hospital
of Caracas, 80% of health workers
reported being without protective
equipment.
José Félix Oletta, Venezuela’s
health minister from 1997 to 1999,
said that while the health system
is “unprepared” for the COVID-19
pandemic, professionals will still do
everything they can. “We are used
to witnessing complex scenarios, of
uncertainty, and rationalising our
behaviours, and this gives us a shield
against fear”, he told The Lancet.
Venezuela’s health crisis is also a
political one. Nicolás Maduro sits in
Miraflores, the presidential palace,
although a US-led coalition of more
than 50 countries does not recognise
him as the legitimate leader. Instead,
those countries back Juan Guaidó, a
young opposition leader who declared
himself Venezuela’s legiti­mate president
in January, last year.
The deadlock was never resolved,
and opposition supporters and inter­
national observers say that the Maduro
administration’s intransigence has
contributed to the crisis. Maduro says
that sweeping US-led sanctions are
hamstringing Venezuela’s ability to
respond to the pandemic, prohibiting
the country from importing medicines
and supplies. He requested US$5 billion
from the International Monetary Fund
to tackle the outbreak, which was
rebuffed on March 18. He subsequently
asked for $1 billion, Bloomberg News
reported.

Joe Parkin Daniels
1023

